In the Garden of My Childhood Home
I am an extraordinarily ordinary woman who has lived an extraordinary life. For a little while, the world of my everyday became the place where the religious go to confront their genesis; I went to be reborn there. I walked ancient lands of ageless beliefs where the patriarchs and pariahs, messengers and messiahs, the baptized and the baptizers of my religious upbringing once lived and breathed, loved and learned and died. I met the modern-day Philistines—the people of Goliath—and the descendants of the Assyrians and Nubians, too. I stood in the Red Sea and the Dead Sea and climbed the mountain from which Moses saw the Promised Land. I bought gold, frankincense, and myrrh in a dark and moody alleyway where one of the three wise men once stood and visited the little chapel in Cairo that covered the cave where the baby Jesus had escaped Herod’s brutality. Their collective stories shaped my early life, and the desert lands of their descendants reshaped it when I was well into adulthood. I became new in the wild waste of the unforgiving desert sands as they swirled and curled into columns of biting, burning heat.
On the Arabian peninsula, camels plodded through drifting dunes, the wild, vibrant-hued birds of the desert sands whistled and shrieked and cawed, and jellies of gelatinous blue spread out on the sharp sands of the Arabian Gulf; I passed them all on my daily comings and goings. I ate meals of lamb and flat bread cooked over open charcoal fires that singed my nostrils while I sat on colorful ground pillows. I listened to the wholehearted laughter of desert women in black abayas and matching head coverings and discovered meaning in kohl-lined eyes even as I learned to distinguish and then use the harsh, guttural words and phrases of the people of the Quran. They both encouraged and mocked my attempts at their language. When I had spent a few winters in the Middle East, I could differentiate the distinctive flavors that bubbled and
3

brewed from the sheesha-smoking coffee drinkers, and I recognized cultural expectations in the way people greeted and took leave of each other.
“Al hamdulillah (thank God),” I learned to say when asked about my health.
“Al hamdulillah,” friends and acquaintances said in response.
Some called it an adventure; others called it a fool’s journey. I called it a necessity. I left
my home and my home country for a job after an ex-military man turned school administrator fired me; he feared losing his own job after I performed particularly well in a review by a team of outside evaluators. My boss did not fare as well, and he took the opportunity to end my job just after Christmas break when the Board of Directors were lulled into safety by the leftovers of holiday cheer. A single woman with two children, the loss of my livelihood threatened my family, my living situation, and the concept I had built up of myself as a professional woman. I was devastated. It was not enough for him to wound me, however. Instead, he went on to smear me, twisting the metaphoric knife he had thrust into me. In the end, he killed my career. While I would eventually win in the courts, I could not wait that long for a job, so I signed a contract to work in the Middle East where I could resurrect my good name.
It was not an easy decision to go. Not easy at all. I was close with my parents, and as my mother fell further and further into the grip of Alzheimer’s, I had spent more and more time with them. But because I needed a job, I was forced to leave them, and with my leave taking, the reality that I may not see them again sat heavily on my heart. My father and I had always had a special connection, but after I was fired, he and I understood each other in a whole new way. Like he had done when he lost his job, I pretended everything was alright. When he offered me cash to “tide me over,” I waved off the need for money.
“I’m alright,” I lied.
4

When he tried to press a few dollars into my hand, I would not take it.
“Dad,” I told him, “when I need it, I promise I’ll ask.”
While he might have been frustrated with me for being stubborn, he knew perfectly well
that sometimes, when everything else was taken away, the only thing left was pride. Even a false pride was better than nothing at all, and so he rarely forced me when it came to money.
My father knew what it was like to live without a job, to feel a palpable panic rise in the morning just after waking; like me, he knew the fear of not being able to feed his children, pay for school, and provide the basics. At the time he was laid off, I was in the third grade, and I only recognized the positive effects of my father’s temporary professional demise; since he no longer worked the dreaded swing shift, he could spend more time at home with his children. My little girl life went on without any noticeable interruptions. I was happy. Yet after I was fired, memories surfaced that challenged my childish perceptions. I saw my father’s new reality more clearly through the eyes of my adult self; my father was more tense, afraid, even sad. So on the morning I left for Abu Dhabi, he knew, as I knew, I had no choice. I had to go where there was work even if it was nine time zones away from him and my mother.
“Come home if you don’t like it,” my father whispered in my ear.
I shook my head in acknowledgement and brushed my cheek against the whiskery warmness of his. I would get the chance to do this just one more time as I prepared for my second flight to the Middle East eight months later; by then, I was traveling back to what had become my home.
“Are you still an American?” my mom asked as I hugged her good-bye. “Yes, mom,” I reassured her; “I’m still American.”
“Okay then,” she said. “Bye.”
5

“I love you, mom.”
“And you’re still an American?” she asked again.
“Yup,” I said with false glee. “Still an American.”
This was her way of recognizing the physical distance that would lay between us. I had
never lived very far from my parents although when I was just shy of twenty, I had traveled to the Soviet Union as an exchange student. Except for that one time, however, I had always lived within an hour or two, if not closer. Despite her creeping dementia, my mom understood I was going somewhere far away, and so she asked the only question she could to almost get at the truth: are you still an American. I kissed her and hugged her and drew in the smell of her hair. My father recognized my growing reticence, so he added his own sarcastic line to break the mood.
“And don’t come home until you make us proud,” he said his voice cracking with emotion.
“I love you, daddy,” I whispered in his ear.
“If you don’t like it,” he whispered back, “you have a home here.”
I held my mother’s hand as I leaned into her, “Remember me, mommy; I already miss
you,” I said.
I left my parents in the garden outside their home as my younger brother prepared to
mow the lawn behind them. Love you, I mouthed to him, and he fake smiled and waved through his fear for me. My father’s sobs mingled with the smell of cut grass, and I turned back just once to look into his eyes. The sound of the lawnmower in the early August morning provided the soundtrack to a father and daughter who stood locked in some kind of shared emotional knowledge. We left it unspoken, however. When my eyes released my tears, his clear, grey-blue
6

eyes let loose as well. In full unmitigated sorrow expressed in short breaths and sobs, I turned back towards the car, heavy-limbed, the emotion stuck in my throat. My daughter reached for my hand and held it tight as we finished the walk through the garden gate of my childhood home.
“I love you,” I sobbed quietly.
It took weeks to feel settled and months to feel some sense of home. When I found the paver and palm-tree lined corniche in the little northern town where I lived, I found a place that called to me and comforted me as I forged a new life. The great white marbled masjid (mosque) sat at the head of the corniche looking out over the Arabian Gulf; its difference became the symbol of my new world. Its four crescent moon-topped spires stood as sentinels at the four corners of the building proper. When night fell, the minarets were lit and shined as beacons across the city. The waters of the Gulf caught the light and cast it in a slightly altered hazy shimmer that rippled in broken-angled ribbons across its breadth.
Just up the street and outside the Marriage Palace, Emirati men twirled swords in a rhythmic, ritualistic celebration; the accompanying music was beat out on nomadic Bedouin- inspired stretch-skinned drums and a stringed zither-like instrument. As the men danced the yolo in a tight shoulder-to-shoulder formation, the birds of the corniche swooped and swallowed with shrieks and squawks, and coffee-drinkers watched and talked from across the street at Costa. I sat among it all—I sat among them all—watching and writing and cataloguing my life choices.
A few months after I arrived in Ras al Khaimah, I fell in love with a kind-hearted, easy- laughing Arab. I convinced myself that an oven and full working cooktop were required to prove it. Never much of a cook, I was sure I was the only woman in the Middle East who did not have a range in the kitchen. But after my marriage to the Palestinian refugee born and bred in
7

Lebanon, I persuaded myself I needed to remedy the situation; after all, I had internalized the saying about a man’s stomach being connected to his heart and all that. Once I bought the flour, sugar, apples, and baking powder, the pots and pans, spatulas and oven mitts, I would prove my love by baking a cake in my brand new oven.
“It smells good,” Fadi said as he walked through the door of our little home.
“I made dinner,” I practically sang to him.
“My God!” he teased.
As Fadi made his way into the kitchen, I checked on the cake while the recipe laid out on
the counter. In the moment between his picking up the recipe and my recollection and connection to what he would read, I blanched. Fadi just laughed.
“You made a Jewish apple cake for your Palestinian husband?” he prodded me. “Fadi!” I began to stumble into an explanation.
“A Jewish apple cake?” he asked again full of merriment. “I hope it’s good,” he said
wrapping his arms around my waist.
When I knew he was delighted by the whole thing, I walked into the other room in a
pretend rage, picked up a pen, returned to the kitchen, scratched out Jewish from the recipe, and turned to him with my hands on my hips. He leaned over and kissed me, and then turned back to the recipe.
“Apple cake?” he read. “You made your Palestinian husband apple cake?” he joked. “Shut up and eat it,” I said laughing.
I wrote to remember. To set down in words my experiences of the Arabian Gulf with its imported white sandy beaches and the smell of the dry desert air especially delicious when
8

winter winds carried the perfume of fragrant fruity tobacco flowing from sheeshas. When I sat on the corniche among the Arab speakers, their language became background music to help me in my pursuit. I wrote about the chatter of men in long white kanduras and white-wrapped heads and the smell of roasted beans from bitter coffee. I wrote to memorialize those I grew to love— Taghreed, the open-hearted, ginger-haired Syrian; Hassan, the chimney-smoking physics teacher from Jordan; and Easa, the inquisitive Emirati school counselor whose name, when translated into English, was Jesus. Mostly I wrote to believe in its truth, to know that what I lived was not some far-off figment of a creative mind. I laid down images and snippets of conversations; moments of laughter; extracts of sadness and loneliness; the sound of desert birds; the smell of warmed bread pudding, umm ali, it was called; the pinging sound of a sandstorm played out on the windshield; and the travel—so much traveling—to exotic, far-off places.
A few years after my arrival in the Middle East, my children and I traveled to the Dead Sea, where a Bedouin boy found the famous scrolls in a hanging cliff cave. It was the place where Jesus and John the Baptist and their followers hung out, and according to most Jordanians, the very site where Sodom and Gomorrah had once been. Although it was breathtakingly beautiful, taking a dip in the iconic sea was not particularly satisfying; in fact, the water stung and the famous salt clung to and clogged the pores of the body. Though it was impossible to sink with all the salt in the Dead Sea, it was equally impossible to feel any kind of relief from the warm weather.
Not far up the road from the Dead Sea was another famous body of water. Unlike the Dead Sea, however, the Jordan River was quite small. And really, really filthy dirty. Although only a few meters from the Israeli side of the river, the separation might as well have been
9

thousands of miles. The cultural, historical, and socio-political divides between the two countries were enormous.
“Anyway,” the Jordanian guide sniffed looking at the hoards being baptized on the other side, “Jesus was baptized here. On the Jordanian side.”
So many feet from the past had walked the pathways my children and I walked to the Jordan River. Close to the edge, we sat down to observe the loud, splashing pilgrims on the Israeli side. Katlyn and I dipped our feet into the atrociously dirty water; Collin held back, his face pinched in disgust.
“Put your feet in,” I told Collin.
“I don’t want to,” he said.
“C’mon, Collin,” Katlyn urged; “just do it.”
“It’s disgusting,” he replied.
“Collin, Jesus may have stood in this very water,” I tried.
A momentary dabble was all he could manage, yet the three of us sat on the side of a
river that held so much meaning in our lives, meaning that was not fully real until the river, itself, became more than a story. It became my story written to memorialize my time away from home in the crucible of three world religions on the edge of the vast desert sands of the Empty Quarter. In the summer months and into the fall, the dry winds of the Rub al Khali brought its inhospitable heat to the shores of the Arabian Gulf. There, the waters simmered and stewed and steamed into a dew-driven cloud of bitter brutality. The desert dunes swirled and settled and choked, and all life stood close to the edge waiting for a break to the seasonal swelter. A bit more than a month after I arrived in the UAE towards the end of September, the swampy, stifling
10

weather remained oppressive. As I stood in the courtyard of the school in Ras al Khaimah where I was the de facto principal, I admitted to Fadi how much I hated the heat.
“I can’t take it,” I said as the students raised the flag of the UAE in the Pan Arab colors: red, white, green, and black.
“Biladi, biladi, biladi,” the boys sang their national anthem.
Fadi understood my statement as an intent to leave the country.
“Give it fourteen days,” he leaned in to say.
“Namal nuklus, namal nuklus,” the boys continued to sing.
“Fourteen days?” I asked with an almost glimmer of hope.
He shook his head yes. When I returned to my office in the ice box air conditioning of the
school, I counted off fourteen days on the calendar and circled the date. I did the same at home and posted that calendar on my refrigerator. Each day I rose and diligently crossed off another day both at home and at work. As the crossed-out days increased and the days left to better weather decreased, my mood lightened. I had begun to settle into my work and into my new life. But on the fourteenth day, the weather was still miserable. There was no miraculous change from one day to the next, so I went to work ready to call out Fadi.
“Just a few more days,” he said. “Insha’allah (God willing).”
I looked at him through squinted eyes to establish his trustworthiness. “Insha’allah,” he said again.
A month later, the weather finally broke. In the meantime, I learned an additional
meaning of insha’allah: in God’s time.
By my second year, the summer heat did not affect me as much. It was terrible,
horrendous, ungodly, but it was never as bad as that first summer. Maybe because, after the first
11

year, I lived through the buildup to the summer swelter. Like the proverbial frog in a pot of water who grew accustomed to each temperature change, I trained for the onset of the season sweat and habituated to each change little by little. For a few years, then, I became a woman of the desert and learned to interact in new ways with new places, new expectations, new people. I became known as a leader, a hard worker, an outspoken critic of the unjust, a wife, a friend, an associate professor. Before long, I walked and ran on the Arabian Gulf and felt the call to prayer ripple through my body until it found a home in my heart. And with the sounds and smells and sights of my new home, I was born again in the crucible of change that is the Middle East. It reshaped and reconstituted me into a new woman, one that combined the best of the new with the best of the woman I had been on the morning when I kissed my parents goodbye in the garden of my childhood home.
12

Intent is a Powerful Thing
When flurries but no accumulation teased us with dreams of a white Christmas, and silvery-tinseled, twinkling-lit trees heralded the arrival of the holiday season, I was feeling unseasonably unsettled as I dealt with the meanness and machinations of a bully: my boss. Despite the negativity on full display at work, the harbingers of the holiday helped me with the routine of buying gifts, hanging stockings, and even sitting on Santa’s lap. Around me, everywhere, the desire for joy was palpable, and soon the interplay between the disparate realities of my life—work and home—became obvious to everyone. Even my mom.
One morning, I met my parents for breakfast. My mother was animated with happiness, filled with anticipation. She’s back, I thought too quickly, a mistake I had already made too many times. My mother was playing a role she had played before, something once known, a hidden memory accessed. Although she no longer carried money or shopped on her own, she was on the hunt for the perfect Christmas gift, just like before. Just like when I was young. Before the Alzheimer’s.
While she still recognized her children by name, my mother grappled with many things, including time. She could not remember the day or the year. Not by a long-shot, in fact. We, her children, seemed to exist in a perpetual time warp of youth, from a phase etched too deep in her memory to be affected by the insidious disease.
“What do you want for Christmas?”
Rather than asking the question of a 44-year old woman, my mother asked the question in a way that presumed a very young child. My dad and I flashed each other knowing glances. My mom—his much loved wife—was lost in another time. In her past. In our shared past. Because I
13

did not want to acknowledge the sorrow that came with knowing, I smiled and answered in a way that hid my true feelings.
“What I want, more than anything in the world,” I told my mom with great flourish, “is to be able to write more.”
“This is what your heart wants most?” my mom asked.
Again, my father and I traded looks. This, too, was a question of concern, not because it showed the advancement of my mother’s disease, but because it was so uncharacteristically deep and spiritual. I felt a warning stinging me on the inside. Be careful, it said. Intention is powerful. But I sank the caution and answered my mom overly cheerfully.
“Yup. That’s what I want, mom. I want more time to write.”
She looked at my father and shrugged her shoulders. “Where do we get that?” she asked him. And then to me, she said, “we’ll do our best.”
The rest of the week moved slowly. Interminably slow. But the holidays finally arrived, and as it is wont to do, time accelerated. Christmas and New Year’s came and went. And too quickly, I returned to work. A few hours into my first day, after teaching a new group of students and briefing my boss on the state of the school, I was called again to his office and fired.
I was stunned, unable to make sense of the situation, as I had just recently been feted by a national accreditation team for the work I had done; my boss, on the other hand, fared poorly in the report, his aggression cited by the team as detrimental to the workings of the school. Yet, I was the one who walked out the door for the last time on that first day back from the Christmas holiday.
The next morning, I met my mom and dad for breakfast. Still reeling, I was not ready for my father’s perpetually sardonic humor.
14

“Looks like you got what you wanted,” my dad said, smirking.
“What?” I asked, confused.
“Now you have more time to write,” my mom said joyfully, delighted really. “What you
wanted more than anything else.”
I looked at both of them in amazement, dumbstruck at the correlation they had made
between my pre-Christmas heart-felt request and my post-Christmas firing.
Turning to my father, my mother smiled in pride: “I knew we’d get her what she
wanted.” As if she had bought it at the mall. As if. Intent is a powerful thing, I heard whispered in the deepest reaches of my mind.
“Now all you need is something to write about,” my dad said.
After my dismissal, I worked to find a job in a profession where, under the best circumstances, the hiring process is ruled by conservativism. So, after a year, when I finally received an opportunity to teach abroad, I jumped at the chance to discuss it. At the very least, the interview—any interview—might be a way to break through the stalemate that had become my professional life. So on an unseasonably warm day just after a brutal winter storm, I was making my way through the slush-filled streets of New York City to meet the woman who would become my next boss.
When I first met Rashida, she was much more subdued than she would be when I worked for her. What I noticed first was an odd mix of stylish and—well—drearily outdated. She dyed her hair shoe-polish black, the color choice of ancient Egyptian women. Thick black eyeliner framed her eyes—kohl, those same Egyptians called it—and a little black flourish complimented the eye-frame at each corner. Above the black eyeliner was a thick layer of hard-to-miss metallic
15

eye shadow in neon green, something that reminded me of a scene from elementary school. As the childhood memory replayed itself in my mind, Rashida continued to hurl questions at me, attempting to gauge my professional skills even as her neon green eye shadow catapulted me out of the interview and back in time, back to when my life played out in the drama of a fifth grader.
It was then when I committed—not-too-stealthily, mind you—my one and only school- day crime. I left the school grounds during lunchtime for my little town’s downtown district. Although I cannot remember why I felt compelled to do this—maybe it was a dare or something done under duress—it was something completely at odds with my personality. Yet, I made my ten-year-old way across busy streets to the local pharmacy where, spread out in a rainbow cornucopia display, a variety of neon-colored eye shadows called to me.
After running my fingers over each one, I chose my color. Neon green. I pulled the top off the shiny-silver lipstick-like tube, twisted out the magnificent color, and rubbed it generously on my eyelids. I returned the eye shadow to the tube, put it back in its display case, and walked out of the pharmacy into the sunshine of an early fall day.
I felt a sense of victory well into the next period until the classroom door banged opened to Sister Joan of Arc—the principal who shared a name with a woman burned at the stake. She— the principal, not the unfortunate martyr—carried a bobbing-for-apples-type tub of water that she placed on our teacher’s desk. We students looked around at each other for understanding. A party? our eyes asked each other. Sister Joan of Arc’s face was much too pinched for that, however. A drowning? Before an answer could be formulated, Sister Joan called out my name in terse tones: “JACLYN. MARIA. FOWLER. Come here.” I had never before, not even once, had my name called in such a fashion by anyone. Not my parents. Not a teacher. Not a principal.
“Where were you at lunch time?”
16

I looked at Sister Joan of Arc as if she had spoken another language; some forty years later, I would look at Rashida the same way as she yelled at me in Arabic.
“I said, where were you at lunch?”
“At Rite Aid,” I answered in the tiniest, mousiest voice.
“And is this allowed?” she demanded.
“No?”
“Of course, no.”
Sister Joan grabbed the back of my neck, “EYE [dunk]. SHADOW [dunk]. IS [dunk].
NOT [dunk]. ALLOWED [dunk].”
Her punishment had the desired effect, and I have never—not in all the years since—
worn green eye shadow. Neon or not. But, on the day of the interview, Rashida did. It made my flesh crawl, my breathing and heartbeat increase, my hands sweat. I looked expectantly at the interview room door, waiting for Sister Joan of Arc.
Rashida stood just over five feet tall, but wore shoes that were so high, they practically doubled her natural height. To compliment her black polyester pants, she wore a tiger-striped blouse that hung loosely over her torso. The pairing made her look frumpy. Rashida’s personality, however, was anything but, and I mistook her rapid-fire questions and argumentative interviewing style for passion, intensity. My longing for someone to hire me severely hampered what normally would have been a much more critical assessment. So when she offered the job, I seriously considered taking it and moving nine time zones away where Rashida—of the Egyptian kohl and neon green eye shadow—would be my boss. When I hedged, it was my father who had to convince me.
“What about you and mom?"
17

“Don’t blame us because you’re afraid,” my father said a little too curtly.
I knew what he meant. He did not want me to go—not really—but he believed I needed to go. It was a chance to restart my life, a life in definite need of reset. He encouraged even as he silently held out hope that I would not have to go.
“And don’t come home until you make us proud,” he said on the morning I left for the airport. His words were merely a façade. Neither he nor I felt anything close to bravery as we hugged each other. When we separated, I walked down the garden path of my childhood home, looked back once to see him crying, and began the trip to a new life.
“Bye,” I cried to no one, everyone, anyone as the plane rolled down the runway at JFK.
Thirty-three hours later, I arrived in Abu Dhabi to August temperatures of 120 degrees. I felt untethered, displaced, so I did what came natural: I called my parents. Although I was nine time zones away, my father was his customarily unsympathetic, witty self.
“Dad, the heat is unbearable. I can hardly breathe.” “What’d ya expect? It’s the desert.”
After only a few days on the ground in the Emirates, I began to understand that my initial assessment of Rashida was pretty spot on. Well almost. She was extraordinary, a standout, passionate, full of zeal. Just not in the traditional sense. Rather, Rashida’s extraordinary-ness was the product of extreme personality traits which she, in turn, raised to a whole new level. Rashida was bat-shit crazy. BAT-SHIT CRAZY. In fact, she was so good at it that the Rashida- personality-package would be praise-worthy if that kind of crazy perfection was actually praised.
Early in the fall semester, for example, Rashida’s office sent out a questionnaire ordering teachers to critique the curriculum. I urged my teachers to reply honestly. Despite a staff of
18

almost eighty teachers, not one teacher—not one—responded, so I tried to strong arm them. “If you don’t, you have no right to complain,” I preached. Only one brave teacher responded to my call to action, writing a simple, six-word sentence—“Give the students more practical work.”
“Who told you to criticize the curriculum?” Rashida stormed at the teacher on a conference call a few days later.
“Umm, you did, Rashida,” I answered in his stead.
“Who’s talking to you?” she screamed into the phone.
“What?” I asked astonished; “he’s responding to your survey.”
“Who told you to criticize the curriculum?” she asked again, ignoring me. “I did,” I interrupted again.
“I. AM. NOT. TALKING. TO. YOU.”
“But it was me,” I said. “I told him to.”
“Are you deaf?”
“You sent a survey,” I pressed on.
“I know!”
“You asked them to send critiques,” I said, feeling as if I had entered the Twilight Zone. “It does not give him—a TEACHER!—the right to criticize the curriculum.”
“You wanted teachers,” I tried again.
“It’s my survey.”
“It says ‘teachers . . . ,’” I began to read directly from the survey.
“I KNOW!” she answered. “But who gave him the right?”
“The survey,” I answered.
“Why are you still talking?” she asked me.
19

“Rashida, . . ..”
Before I could finish the sentence, the line went dead. Rashida, I surmised, had hung up. Or maybe, I thought, we got disconnected. Unsure, I dialed her back.
“Rashida?”
“YOU?”
“I think we got disconnected.”
“I HUNG UP!”
I tried again, “I told teachers to respond. I thought you wanted them to.”
“Now you know what I want?”
“It’s on the survey.”
“I KNOW WHAT MY SURVEY SAYS!”
“But . . ..” And the phone went dead again.
While I called back several times over the next few days, the issue was never resolved.
Instead, after a week, we simply dropped the whole affair.
Over the next few months, all meetings with Rashida had the flavor and confusion of that
first phone call. At full staff meetings where administrators from fourteen campuses met to discuss issues, Rashida’s hours-long tirades sucked all the oxygen and most of the creative energy from the room. Arguments were circular and fruitless. If someone said A, Rashida said B, even if she believed A. Even if we were being held accountable for not doing A. Only Rashida could have an opinion. It was clear she feared a challenge more than she valued competency. So, in the end, the thirty of us simply sat quietly as she rained her vitriol down on us; it was just easier—and faster—that way.
While I liked my job overall, Rashida’s behavior often made me nostalgic for the sanity-
20

restoring sarcasm of my father and the tiny, sweet “Hello Jaclyn” of my mother. I began calling several times a week, an update on all things new, an assurance of what was still the same. Just hearing their voices gave me a sense of home. And sanity.
“You just sit there?” my father asked when I told him about staff meetings. “For hours.”
“That’s dumb.”
“Right?”
“Do something productive,” he advised as if I were to blame.
“Maybe I should knit?” I asked sarcastically.
“Why don’t you write? That’s what you wanted to do, right?”
“Impossible,” I said, rolling my eyes. “We’re stuck in a room with Rashida.” “Pretend you’re taking notes,” my father said.
His words made sense; his advice was brilliantly simple. “I miss you, dad,” I relented.
“Me too?” my mom asked.
“You too, mommy.”
“Then come home,” she said simply.
“I wish I could.”
“Is it what your heart wants most?” my mom asked.
Intent is a powerful thing, I thought.
“Do you want to see me alive?” my dad added morbidly.
I answered both with one yes.
After hanging up, I ached more ferociously for home, for my dad, my mom. And so, after
21

eight months in desert exile, I boarded a flight to the comforting familiarity of Northeastern Pennsylvania just as spring buds appeared on the trees and daffodils poked their golden crowns through winter’s last stand of melting snow. It was what my heart wanted—and needed—most.
22

10,000 Things: False Boundaries, Devastation, and the Rebuilding of a Life
I live in Ras al Khaimah, an out of the way place nestled between the rolling waves of the desert sands and the salty still of the Arabian Gulf. I’m a few months into my third year here, separated by nine time zones from my family and friends, from my country, from another lifetime. As unsettling as starting over is, I have begun to feel comfortable here. But isn’t that the way it goes? We feel out of place. We learn to survive. We adapt. We regain our equilibrium. We begin to live again. While I call Ras al Khaimah home, it certainly isn’t Home. Home—with a capital H—is still firmly planted among the mountains of northeastern Pennsylvania. It is where my mom’s heart—older and weaker—still beats, still calls to me. But now I live in the Middle East, an almost new person. I travel more. I spend more time in cities as opposed to the small towns of my old life. I eat different foods, dabble in yoga, meditate, and forego alcohol. I do not wear a head scarf, but I have learned to respect the women who choose to wear one. I speak Arabic . . . poorly, haltingly . . . but even this is changing.
This morning as I prepare for work, I wonder for the zillionth time, how did I end up here? Like a PowerPoint presentation on loop, I see images, I hear voices, I re-experience the scenes of my past. I dream about home in my sleep. And in my waking hours. There are times when I swear I hear my dad’s voice, my mom’s laugh, or feel the phantom chill of the season’s first Nor’easter. Like the ghost pains that plague those who have lost limbs, my pains are those of a lost life. How did I end up here?
On my way to Dubai, I switch on the NPR podcast, already nine hours stale, but still the most current, most trustworthy news I can get. It is always the same these days: Trump, Trump and the sex tape, the hurricane, Syria, Trump, Trump and the Russians. Dear God, I pray, I scream, I plead, let this hateful election. Let it end. I have not yet figured out why I am so deeply
23

affected by it all. In time, I will make the connection. This new mind track crashes into the loop of the one already playing, ceaselessly searching for an answer to the question, how did I end up here? While the Trump track does not interfere with the original thought-track, it does give me something new to consider when the two meet in my mind. I’m here so I don’t have to deal directly with Trump, I think. Then just as quickly the silent arbiter of my revelations–track number three, if you’re keeping count—chimes in, nope, that’s not it.
Look at me, the sun insists, just beginning its ascent. Here, when the sun calls, desert dwellers take heed; its powerful, deadly heat rules the desert. Yet, as with all things, there is balance. The sunrise here is magnificent, breathtaking. In its almost-equator enormity, the sun sizzles, its ray-hands gyrating in the early morning air; the desert floor shimmers and dances in response. Track four—the sunrise—has been initiated, providing yet more competition for all the other disparate thoughts taking up space in my mind.
“On May 31, 2015, Austin Beggin’s life changed forever,” the disembodied voice reports from the car radio; it interrupts my thoughts, interrupts the sunrise. “I know what that’s like,” I say out loud to no one. As I turn onto the highway, the final moments of the sun’s passage from desert floor to sky moves behind me and out of view. So with words and phrases I almost hear— wave, face down, paralyzed from the neck—my scattered focus begins a shift to NPR.
But before the shift is complete, something new intrudes, catching my eye off to one side of the highway. A truck in the right-hand lane. Like a stubby little arm turned up at the elbow in muscle pose, the truck’s side mirror holds a compressed version of the sunrise taking place behind us, miniature explosions of orange and gold in a confined space. “Maybe this is why I’m here,” I whisper. And it seems as good a reason as any. To see the sun’s majesty manifested and magnified in a mirror the size of a forearm seems to answer the question that relentlessly,
24

achingly runs through my mind: how did I end up here? I do not fully grasp its meaning yet, but I have a sense that I will. With time. The driver of the truck notices me staring. I nod and smile. He pushes hard on the accelerator.
“In every sort of lifetime, we can do about 10,000 things,” a radio voice calls me back inside the little red Nissan. A therapist is giving advice to the newly paralyzed character at the heart of the NPR story—Austin Beggins. “So, what’s gonna happen now,” the therapist says; “is you’re going to do a different 10,000 things than you were gonna do before.” And just like that, all the thought-tracks in my mind come to a full stop, a screeching of brakes on the road of my mind. For the first time since rolling out of bed this morning, I am fully engaged in one thing: the 10,000 things. This, this, the silent arbiter of my mind urges, this is why you’re here.
In January 2013, I was fired from a job by a man, an army-officer-turned-pseudo- educator with an abundance of autocratic-like qualities. In one fell swoop, I had been expelled from my profession, my passion, my life, from the way I perceived myself, from the way others perceived me. I had been abused and mistreated by a man, an ex-lieutenant colonel who threw his physique, his deep, overpowering voice, and his ugly views of the world into the faces of all those who stood in opposition to him, silent or otherwise. An oppressive bully, a demagogue, he fought against anything or anyone—especially a woman—who threatened his view of himself as “the fucking President” of a little private school. We—the two of us—represented a paradox of epic proportions; I would be the one to pay for it.
He peddled in half-truths and deception, smears and conspiracies until he believed them himself, and through the conviction of his own beliefs, others began to believe them as well. Even when they did not. Too often, I disrupted his authoritarian tendencies. Too often, I spoke
25

the truth when others feared to. “Please say something,” they would beg me before meetings, and I would. Always politely, of course. Always professionally. Much too often, however, my words threatened his view of how women should behave. Deferentially, mostly. Especially when it came to him. And when he finally recognized my honest resistance to the fear he sowed, he shut me down—just a woman, he believed—with all the vengeance and fury he could muster.
Mine is not an isolated story. Rather, many, many people have seen their lives destroyed, their worth diminished because they have been viewed through the lens of a single characteristic: woman, black, refugee, Muslim, gay. I am a woman. One man used my woman-ness to dismiss my abilities, my thoughts, my worth. His peculiar combination of authoritarianism and misogynistic tendencies could only see part of me—the woman part—and the rest of me conflicted with his views on what woman should be. The consequence to me, of course, was that he was able to strip me of the full range of who I am to create a simple, definable boundary.
This boundary gave him a way to ratchet up his ugly rhetoric and corresponding behaviors, granting him access to a righteous indignation, a sense of being the victim, a designation which he did not deserve. In turn, I became the “other,” the hated, the despised, and eventually the hunted. While most could see this evolving, many feared retribution for speaking out against it. My life was devastated, at least initially, and changed irrevocably as a result. A few years later, I left home for the Middle East because I had to. Because I needed a job to care for my children. I took my first step to reconstituting my 10,000 things. My different 10,000 things.
After only four months in the United Arab Emirates, I took my second step. I married. A Muslim. A Palestinian. A refugee. All in one man. Although he was born and raised in Lebanon, my husband is a citizen of nowhere, a man without a home country. Like the wind, he has no real point of origin; there is no place for him to die. His parents arrived in Lebanon as toddlers after
26

being safely transported from their homes in Haifa during the Arab-Israeli War of 1947. Their families were assured they would be allowed to return when the fighting subsided. “Only a few weeks,” they were told, so the families locked the doors of their homes, left everything behind— furniture, family photos, money, memories, neighbors, everything—and traveled temporarily to Lebanon. A forced vacation of sorts, they fully expecting to return home. They are still waiting. For 68 years, they have lived as refugees, bearing sons and daughters, grandchildren, and great- grandchildren without any hope of citizenship. Most of the world, I have learned, is neither gracious nor fair-minded when it comes to some singular characteristics: Muslim, Palestinian, refugee, among them.
Fadi and I met at work and became friends, best friends. He challenged me on topics of religion and ethics. I challenged him on his rigid views about the west, views mostly derived from movies. One night, as he helped my son put a new bike together, he acted distracted, edgy.
“What’s wrong with you?” I asked.
He looked down, not at me, and mumbled. “Will you marry me?”
I gagged. Not a good first response to a marriage proposal. But he had surprised me, had
caught me completely off-guard. To me, a date or two had always seemed a reasonable expectation as a precursor to marriage. But Fadi didn’t date. “Muslim men do not date,” he told me.
“No. Don’t,” he tried to discourage the gag reflex in me. “I promise you’ll love me.”
Fadi spent the next few minutes laying out his case. He spent the next few days awkwardly asking me to consider his offer before accepting or rejecting it. “Just think about it, okay?” A few weeks later, I consented.
“Dad?” I asked over Skype, “This is Fadi.”
27

“What’s his name?” my dad asked, acting as if only I could hear him. “Fadi.”
“Family? His name is Family?”
“Fadi,” I corrected, flushing.
“What the hell kind of name is Family?” my dad asked.
“FADI,” I shouted through the screen at him. “F-A-D-I.”
Somehow my dad had intuited something big was coming, and he wasn’t going to make
it easy.
“Fadi? Well what the hell kind of name is Fadi?”
My mother waved a tiny wave at the computer screen. “Hi Jaclyn,” she chirped. Rapidly
declining under the curse of Alzheimer’s, my mother no longer had any pretense nor had she any remaining scripts for communicating competently. Smiling blankly had mostly taken the place of engaging. “Are you still American?” she asked. “I am, mom. Don’t worry.” She waved her tiny wave again.
“Hello, Jack,” Fadi interrupted.
My dad raised his eyebrows. This man—sitting thousands of miles away with his youngest daughter—was already calling him by his first name.
“You don’t know me,” Fadi started. “Damn right,” my father interrupted. “But I want you to trust me.”
“Why the hell would I trust you?” This has started off well, I thought.
28

Fadi pushed on, explaining how we had met. We had become friends, something that, Fadi tried to explain, was unusual in this part of the world. Men. Women. Blah. Blah. Blah. He talked about his own family and said that he wanted to honor me by making me happy. After several minutes, Fadi paused to assess my father’s mood.
“I can’t understand a word he’s saying.”
“Dad,” I said embarrassed, “he can hear you.”
“Well, I can’t understand him,” he said again to me, not to Fadi.
Fadi, still in high spirits, started again. He spoke slower, pausing from time to time to
allow my father to catch up. And then he asked.
“May I have your permission to marry your daughter.”
It was the first thing my father had understood all night.
“I don’t know you,” my dad shouted at Fadi’s request.
“Dad?” I whined at the screen; “be nice.”
“I like him,” my mom offered blankly, finally noticing Fadi. “I think he’s handsome.” “Jesus, Joanne, you don’t know even him.”
She smiled, undeterred by my father’s words and waved a tiny wave at me. “Hi Jaclyn.” “Hi mom.”
Fadi tried again. He listed all the reasons why he would be a good husband. He talked
about his plans for the future. He smiled broadly, believably and gestured at my father. “So would you give me your blessing, Jack?” Fadi asked.
“My blessing?” he asked in a way that said no.
“I like him. He’s handsome,” my mom said again.
“Jesus, Joanne, shut up.”
29

She smiled. And waved. “Hi Jaclyn.”
“Hi mom.”
We were in full blown Fowler mayhem, going nowhere. Based on the experiences of my
past, I knew we would continue to go nowhere fast. But Fadi, who was not at all flustered, spoke again.
“Jack, I love her.”
I stopped. Turned to Fadi. Teared up. I hadn’t heard him say it before. I hadn’t heard anyone say it for a very long time. My dad noticed and stopped talking. After a few minutes, my father, calmer now, resumed.
“You love her?”
“I do,” Fadi said. And turning to me, Fadi said, “tell him I don’t lie.” And turning to my father, he said, “I don’t lie.”
My father’s eyes welled up. He looked at my mom who continued to look blankly at the computer screen in front of her. From time to time, she waved, and I waved back. But my dad? I knew what he was thinking. With Fadi’s declaration of love, my father considered the woman sitting next to him—my mom—and their long life together. I could see the pain of my mother’s Alzheimer’s in my father’s eyes. I understood how his heart broke for the love that was still between them—would always be between them—but because of my mother’s illness, had not been able to be expressed in the way it had always been. My mother sat smiling, unaware, in the same way she had since the beginning of the conversation, but Fadi’s declaration had softened my father.
“Do you love him?” my father asked. “I don’t know,” I responded.
30

This was not the answer he expected.
“You’re both nuts,” my father threw up his hands in exasperation. “Do what you want. You’re old enough.”
Fadi looked confused.
“He said yes,” I told him. “Kind of.”
“Yes?” Fadi asked my dad.
“It’s up to her. She’s old enough.”
“I like him. He’s handsome,” my mom said again.
“You better like him. He’s going to marry her,” my dad said.
“Who’s getting married?” my mom asked.
“For God’s sake, Joanne. Jaclyn. Jaclyn’s getting married.”
“To who?” she asked innocently.
“To Fadi, mom,” I answered.
When she turned to look at me, I pointed at Fadi.
“Oh, good. He’s handsome,” she replied.
“I’m Muslim,” Fadi announced nervously. “And Palestinian.”
“I’m happy for you,” my dad responded, screwing up his eyes. He did not understand the
relevance of Fadi’s revelations.
Then Fadi spoke again, “can I call you dad?”
“He couldn’t stop while he was ahead, could he?” my dad asked me, rolling his eyes and
shaking his head.
31

I married Fadi on a Friday in December at the home of a Jordanian judge. I wore a scarf. I had to. The court system in the UAE is Islamic; as such, everyone must follow the traditional rules. “But it’s not my belief,” I sulked. Fadi tenderly drew the scarf around my head. “I’m so happy,” he announced, ignoring my pout. “All the wedding pictures with this?” I gestured to the scarf. Fadi’s hands trembled as he made the final loop of scarf around my neck. “You wear veils in the west,” he proposed as a way to settle me. I balked. An hour after arriving as a single woman in hijab, I left the judge’s home as a wife. I smiled and held Fadi’s hand for the first time. Then I remembered my earlier distress, tore the scarf off my head, and cut up all the pictures of me in hijab. Fadi kept one; it is still in his wallet.
One year after marrying, we decided to begin the process of returning to America. Together. I saw this as another of the 10,000 things of my new life. We hired a Washington lawyer. We filled out paper after paper after paper, paying progressively higher and higher fees. I volunteered at the American Consulate in Dubai, hoping to better understand the immigration process. Things were proceeding beautifully. Then, at a critical juncture, Trump burst onto the American political scene, called for a ban on Muslims, and quelled our enthusiastic march towards returning to America. I now find myself in the odd situation of having had one hate- filled misogynistic man push me from my home country and another hate-filled misogynistic man who has the potential of keeping me from returning, all because both have chosen to define multi-nuanced individuals through the lens of just one characteristic.
I am a woman, but who I am encompasses so much more than that. Likewise, Fadi is a Muslim man, a Palestinian, a refugee. But this is too limited a definition of him. He is a brilliant math teacher, one of the best I’ve ever seen. Despite the odds, he is well educated, even now
32

pursuing a master’s degree. He is a father of three, kind and generous and attentive to his children, hardly ever missing a single dinner with them. He is a stepfather to two, using humor to guide my children, using love to bond them to him. He is a son, a brother, a friend, the e- Learning Coordinator at his school. He is a mentor, a practical joker, a man who was nationally rated as a player of table tennis and rated again in chess. He is a musician and the worst handyman I have ever met. He is the love of my life, my husband. And I am his wife. A woman. And so much more.
How did I end up here? I came to understand that the actions of others frequently hurt, but our own reactions modulate the power differential in the interaction. I ended up here, then, to choose to hold onto my power in the face of a life devastated by one man’s narrow definition of the multi-faceted, many-sided me. So how did I end up here? I have come to take a stand against a boundary that forced me into the role of “other,” and I have come as witness in support of the other “others.” How did I end up here? I am here to understand that the sun’s majesty manifested and magnified in a mirror the size of a forearm is a visceral reminder of the potential of self- regeneration. In other words, I have come to live out my new 10,000 things.
33

Smooth Like Water
Being cool was really hard in the hell-like heat of the desert summer. On the morning I met him, perspiration ran down my back and pooled at my bra line; my white linen shirt—a maze of wrinkles where the seatbelt had been—hung limp from hunched shoulders. My glasses were fogged; my face was crimson, and the wet heat of the unbearably hot cemented my hair to my forehead. Afraid of the sweat stains underneath, I did not want to lift my arms far from my side, so I dog-tilted my head to rake through my hair with splayed fingers. I also stood slightly bow-legged, so my thighs would not rub together; I had not yet learned to wear silky shorts under skirts. On the morning I met him, I was a hot mess. Literally.
After several lonely weeks in the UAE, my son and Doodles finally arrived in the middle of a work week. It would be early, early morning before the dog made it through customs, so Collin and I caught up with each other in a swanky hotel across the street from the airport. But by then, he had been in transit for almost two days and was worn out. The sleek steel skyline of Dubai spread out in front of him, and while he noticed its glamor and commented on its Star Wars-like quality, he was too glassy-eyed, too exhausted to be impressed. Once we had the dog, I spent hours driving in circles trying to find my way back to the little town in the north on the Arabian Gulf, so by the time we reached our rented room, my almost unresponsive son collapsed into bed. Two hours later, I woke him for work.
“I just need to show my face,” I explained.
“Call in sick, mom,” he moaned.
In the UAE, there was no such thing as a sick day; it took work to be sick. Every
morning, I timed in with a fingerprint and, each late afternoon, timed out the same way. Meticulous records were kept regarding my every move, and work, I was told often enough, was
34

the reason I was given residency. Do not miss work, in other words. If I did, I needed a sick note. From the hospital. Fortunately, doctors were obliging. They, too, came from other countries and knew the rules; their notes freed workers for two days. For a little extra on the side, a worker could get three days. But in the first few weeks, I learned how to get around the draconian rules; I had already asked permission of my immediate supervisor—a Canadian—to miss work.
“Don’t forget to sign in and out,” he added with his consent.
And so, on the morning after my trip to the Dubai Airport, I braved the hellish heat and high humidity to add my fingerprint to the morning record of ex-patriot whereabouts. My too- tired-to-be-anything-but-compliant son trailed along as we walked the atrium to my office. In many schools and office buildings in the UAE, indoor atriums held raised marble beds of short- pruned, green-leaved trees, spiky long flowers of red, and yellow mum-like puffs; they were an oasis of sorts away from the summer sizzle of the desert and in the comfort of the temperature- controlled buildings. The humidity in the administrative wing-cum-indoor garden was tempered by the AC-induced, almost freezer-like atmosphere; sometimes when the two collided, we had fog in the school building.
As soon as I fingerprinted in and walked Collin around the marble beds of flowers and trees, I was surrounded by three tall Arabs—an Egyptian, a Jordanian, and a Moroccan-turned- American passport holder. All three men were tall, one was stocky, and the other two were muscular, but thin. I watched Collin watching me; I needed to prove to him that we had made the right choice by moving to the UAE. I was not yet convinced.
“Hello,” he purred from behind our little group. “Fadi,” the Egyptian laughed, grabbing his hand. “I’m Fadi,” he said over my left shoulder
35

“Jackie,” I answered.
Fadi reached his hand out to each of his male colleagues. This was one of the things about the Middle East I had grown to love. Arab men were genuinely happy to see each other even when they weren’t; a handshake was a gesture of friendship even when they had just met. So men shook hands heartily, not at all for perfunctory reasons. In addition to a handshake, Emirati men touched noses; it was a show of strength. I am not afraid of you, it said. They took their time with greetings. Kaif halik? the Arabs asked. Americans used the same phrase—how are you?—but in a type of pseudo greeting that did not require an honest answer. When Arabs asked, however, they expected an answer. A real answer. More importantly, they expected to have the question posed to them in return. For their real answer.
“How are you?” Abdelghani, the Moroccan, asked Fadi.
“Al hamdulillah (thank God),” he responded. “And you?”
“Al hamdulillah,” all four men mumbled, each taking a turn to shake their colleague’s
outstretched hand.
When I first arrived in the UAE, I was overly time conscious—just like an American
would be. I had been trained by my culture to get to the point, but the point was moot with an Arab if the greeting was not done properly. Business should never come above the person, they believed. But in the beginning of my tenure, I did not understand this simple truth and missed opportunities. Instead, I launched right into the topic at hand. When I wrote emails, I simply conveyed information without spending even a sentence to greet the reader, and I found I was only mildly successful at my job. Eventually I learned, and then, not only did my productivity at work increase but my friendships outside of work increased as well.
36

Of course, the interactions between men and women were slightly different. Many men in the Arab world did not shake a woman’s hand; it was considered haram (sinful). By some. While it was not a settled topic, many Muslim men chose not to shake a woman’s hand out of respect. For her. And her husband. After some time, I stopped taking it as a personal slight; in fact, I stopped offering my hand at all. Yet, as between men, a greeting was expected even if it looked slightly less expressive between members of the opposite sex.
As the men answered questions about their respective families, a young Emirati woman in black abaya and veil interrupted, “I need your signature,” she said, pushing a clipboard towards me.
I turned my focus away from the men and towards Hibba. She was young, tall and angular, and her smooth, lightly powdered face was framed by the black shayla wrapped loosely around her head. Hibba had puffy lips and large brown soulful eyes, rimmed with black kohl. Her fingers were long and tapered, and she walked without noise, stately, majestically. She was intelligent and good-natured, but she was tough when she needed to be, especially with the Arab men at the school. I grew to love her like a daughter.
“You met Fadi?” she laughed nodding towards him.
“Just now,” I said.
She rolled her eyes, “he’s always joking,” she said as she walked away.
Later, after Fadi and I were married, we called Hibba to tell her first. It was her job to
create the announcements for the school and the school system.
“We married,” Fadi told her in English as he gestured towards me.
She laughed.
“We really did get married,” I added as Fadi repeated it again in Arabic.
37

Still, Hibba laughed. “Fadi always jokes,” she said looking to me for confirmation.
“It’s true, Hibba,” I said.
She dropped like dead weight into the blue-cushioned chair nearest her.
“Maasha’allah (God has willed it),” she said. “It is good,” she declared as the color began
to return to her face.
But on Collin’s first full day in the country, Fadi and I had only just met. With my first look at the man, I sucked in the air around me and flushed with the all too obvious assessment of him. I looked for his wedding band and was relieved when I did not see one. What’s wrong with me? I thought and fought to regain my business-like control. When he held out his hand to shake mine, I instinctively reached for it. He must be OK with it, I thought. Mechanically, I placed my left hand over top of our shaking hands, and this time, I noticed his flush.
Fadi was smooth. Like water, he moved with a fluidity that was more like dancing than walking. His Arabic sounded more musical than the Arabic of the others, especially the Jordanian’s whose accent seemed harder, more guttural. Fadi was different. A Palestinian, I learned in conversation, not from him, but from the Jordanian, Hatem. The information was supposed to mean something to me. It did not.
“But I was born in Beirut,” Fadi added.
His curly hair was cut close, silver with a hint of the black it used to be. And his thin, silver wire-rimmed glasses complimented both his hair and his coppery brown eyes. A perfectly groomed mustache and goatee punctuated the lips that were too thin, the one thing on his face that was not perfect. Fadi was more aware of his looks, his walk, his movements; he had worked to cultivate a particular vibe. Later, when I watched him walk away, I was reminded of the old
38

black and white Fred Astaire movies. Put him in a black tux with tails, and Fadi would be at ease among the smooth-moving, smooth-talking movie stars of the Copacabana Club. Later, when I had learned more about the culture, I understood why it was important to know he was born and raised in Lebanon. The Lebanese are known as the Parisians of the Arab world, and Fadi certainly fit the stereotype.
“He teaches math,” Abdelghani said.
“Our e-Learning Coordinator,” Hatem added.
“Fadi!” Abdullah repeated.
“How do you find the school?” Fadi crooned.
“It’s nice. I like the gardens,” I replied pointing to the raised marble beds.
“Good,” he said, adding, “whatever you need, I’m here,” and he shifted his position
again, jutting his hips into my space just slightly, seemingly cutting out all the other members of our conversation.
I looked to Collin to see if he had noticed the momentous moment. He was too tired and did not seem to care. I was disappointed. Katlyn would have caught it all: every nuance, every shift, every movement and, later, we would have dissected every aspect of the meeting. She would have recognized my faux pas with Fadi: the gasp when I first met his gaze. Katlyn would have assured me that no one else had noticed, however. She would have spent time answering my every question. She would have noticed how Fadi shook my hand and how he purred out his willingness to help and what she thought he thought about me and how he walked and how he laughed, and she would have taken note of a thousand million other details. Katlyn would have, but not Collin.
“We met before,” Fadi said and waited for me to acknowledge it.
39

I considered the meaning behind his statement. He thinks we’re soul mates, I thought. He would have seen the color change in my face; since I came to the UAE, it was the one thing that most impressed people. My white, white, Irish skin showed every emotion; the crimson flush highlighted and punctuated my every feeling.
“The email,” he hinted.
Not soul mates, I thought a little dejectedly. What email? I thought and searched my memory. When it finally dawned on me, I shouted out, “PLATO. The password for PLATO, right?”
He nodded his head and smiled. Almost a week earlier, I sat at my computer in the emptiness of a Saturday in a school building. One man—Fadi—kept interrupting me. He was overly concerned about the online learning platform.
“Thanks,” I replied to his first email and returned to work.
Ding, his next email announced itself.
“Did you try it? See if works,” he wrote.
Frustrated, I set work aside to try the password I would never use again. Ding, another email came through.
“I’m waiting,” it said, and I laughed at its brazenness. “Give me a second,” I responded.
Ding.
“Well?”
“I like this guy,” I whispered to the computer screen. “He’s funny.”
40

Standing in the indoor atrium, Fadi launched into a joke, “one day an American woman wanted to prove to a Syrian man that she was free. ‘You know,’ she said, ‘I can even stand on the White House lawn and curse Obama,’” Fadi winked.
“Fadi,” Hatem cautioned.
“Oh my God,” Abdullah blurted out.
And they all—all four Arab men—turned towards me.
“Yes?” I said, rolling my eyes at his obvious jab.
Fadi tilted his head towards me, raised his shoulders to match his eyebrows, and smirked. “No, Fadi,” Hatem counseled him.
“Well?” I prodded.
“And the Syrian man said, ‘I can do the same thing.’”
“Fadi,” Hatem interrupted again.
Fadi pushed on.
“’You can?’ the American woman asked. ‘Of course,’ the Syrian man explained; ‘I can
stand on the White House lawn and curse Obama, too,’” Fadi said triumphantly.
Before I could laugh, however, Collin whined, “Mom.”
He was tired, jet-lagged, struggling to stay awake.
“Wait in my office,” I said, gesturing across the administrative block. And then to the
men around me, “we only slept a couple of hours. I picked him up in Dubai last night.” They nodded.
“I should get him home.”
Except I didn’t have a home. I paid for a villa, had it cleaned, and only the day before, waited in the 125 degree weather for furniture. When it came, sweat poured off the men who
41

delivered it the way water poured off the bodies of the Tahitian women in the sexy knock offs of Gauguin’s colorful paintings. There was no electricity for the AC or the chiller, as the Emiratis called it. No water either. And in the desert, these things were not luxuries; they were essentials. Still, I thought, I needed to take him somewhere. The kid needed some rest.
I glanced across the administrative block to my office, and the heads of the Arab men followed. Collin sat on the light blue sofa in my office, book in hand, head resting on the back of the chair, snoring. It had only taken moments for him to fall into a deep sleep.
“Miss Jackie,” Abdullah ventured to break the silence, “can I ask you to do something?” “I’m not really here, Abdullah,” I teased; “I took the day off.”
Abdullah looked confused; he didn’t understand sarcasm. Why would he? I chastised
myself. English is his second language.
“It’s a joke, Abdullah,” I explained.
Abdullah sniggered, but he did not really understand. The men looked to Fadi for an
explanation. He had none and shrugged his shoulders.
After Abdullah’s request, my answer, and a few more minutes of chit-chat, the group
dispersed. Fadi lingered a bit longer and ended up walking me back to my office; the other men watched him suspiciously. Once there, we fell into easy conversation, whispering in deference to Collin. It would be the first of many conversations, the first of many times that Fadi and I would hash out the problems at work, the problems of the world, the difference in religious beliefs. It would be the first of many times I would laugh at Fadi’s jokes, and he would guide me in the cultural expectations of my new home.
42

After a few minutes together in conversation, I forgot I had found Fadi handsome. The warmth of his handshake and the tone of his voice melted away into memory. None of it mattered. He was my first honest-to-goodness friend in the Middle East.
“Would you write an announcement of our marriage?” Fadi asked the newly-recovered Hibba. She had just righted herself into a more formal, more lady-like, more dignified posture after her fall into the blue cushioned chair.
“Do you have chocolates?” she asked.
It was an essential question. When someone in the UAE had come into luck—the birth of a child, the buying of a new car, a marriage—they shared their luck by sharing chocolates. I had anticipated Hibba’s question and bought 300 dirhams worth of candy at the sheikh’s over-the-top all-chocolate store. So when she asked, I nodded at the blue-cellophane-wrapped silver tray of chocolate from Al Shocolata. The Chocolate. They were the first words I learned to read in Arabic. Abdelghani taught me.
“You have done a good thing,” Hibba told me; “he is Palestinian.” “She means I need a passport,” Fadi explained. He was a refugee. Hibba nodded and took my hand, “I’m happy.”
“We will have a cheap dinner!” Fadi announced.
Hibba made a tiny clap to show her approval.
A cheap dinner? I thought. I began to doubt my decision to marry a man who thought so little of me. And, then, there was the passport thing. My anxiety began to grow.
“And I will kill the cheap myself,” Fadi added.
A sheep dinner, a sheep dinner, I thought to assuage my growing fear.
43

Later, after Hibba made the announcement and the chocolates were eaten, Abdullah, Hatem, and Abdelghani who had been there on the morning I met Fadi came in quick succession to make sure the news of our marriage was true. “Is it for real?” they asked one by one surrounded by the raised marble beds of the indoor atrium. Like Hibba, they knew Fadi as a practical joker, so they looked to me for confirmation. When they almost but not quite believed, they congratulated us. “Maasha’allah,” they said and shook Fadi’s hand.
44

Those Poor Sheep and the Golden Tulip
Dubai delighted the senses with a smorgasbord of the biggest, the best, the most expensive, the unusual, the garish, and the gaudy. Despite the fact that Dubai sat squarely in the heart of the desert’s heat, it boasted a fully-functioning ski slope inside one of its malls; outside another, colored lights and loud music accompanied the spraying jets of dancing water from its most famous fountain. Behind it, the tip of the world’s tallest building pierced through the clouds and into the sky and, not far away from the Burj Khalifa was the Burj al Arab, the only seven- star hotel in the world. Down at the edge of the Gulf, the largest man-made island spread its palm tree branches out to hold the homes and hotels of the rich and famous, and the largest manufactured marina filled the desert-dry city with the waters of the Arabian Gulf.
The skyline was a scene reminiscent of Star Wars with buildings competing to be the most outlandish. The steel structure of one building twisted and turned a full 90 degrees from ship to stern; silver sparkles danced in the desert sun on another building of deep blue water- colored glass. A silver-ring-shaped museum with Arabic script engraved across its edifice sat tilted on its side, and a crescent moon hospital lit up the sky at its tips. One immense golden- filigreed structure framed the financial district. Literally. The gold and glass of the Dubai Frame captured the morning sun and spread it across the city in a carpet of light.
“Mom, can we go to Dubai?” Collin pleaded a few weeks after he had arrived.
So on a Friday night before EID, my son finally saw another of Dubai’s architectural wonders. The massive floor to ceiling aquarium of live otters, jellies, and rays sat inside the world’s largest mall. Those who could pay suited up in scuba gear and swam with the sharks in the cerulean blue, surreal waters of the enormous glass enclosure while shoppers stopped to snap pictures of them. And of the multi-colored, multi-species fish population too. One floor above
45

the Dubai Aquarium, Collin and I stopped by the open-air ice rink on our way to the famous sculpture of diving men, and later, we watched the water show from a crowded bridge outside of the Dubai Mall and in front of the Burj Khalifa. After nine hours of indoor sightseeing and fighting the massive holiday shopping crowd, Collin and I made our way back to the celebrated Arab souq (bazaar) that sat inside the mall. We were heading home.
Before we could leave, however, my cell rang.
"Halooo. Halooo. Miss Jackleen?" the woman on the phone asked.
"Yes, this is Jackie,” I answered plugging my free ear. “Who’s this?"
“Arabic. Arabic name. Arabic. More Arabic. Arabic,” the woman said.
It was too loud in the mall, and I was too new to Arabic to know the accent. I understood
nothing. Not a word. Rather than ask her to spell out her name, however, I assumed it was a mother of one of my students and would ask her to call the school on Sunday morning, the first day of the Arabic work week. In the quiet of my office, I would be able to translate the message into something I could understand.
"Hello!” I responded. “How can I help you?" I asked as I crouched into a corner of the mall and covered my open ear with the palm of my hand.
"I'll pick you up. Eight morning. Tomorrow," she said.
"Excuse me?"
"For EID, I'll pick you up. Eight morning,” she said again. Then, she ended the
conversation before I could respond.
EID is the Islamic version of Christmas and Easter all wrapped up into one fabulous
three-day Islamic holiday. Instead of a focus on Jesus, of course, EID retold the story of the prophet Abraham. And just like Abraham would do, good Muslims were expected to slaughter
46

animals and give the meat to the poor. In return for their charity, they too would receive something: a blessing from God or, in Arabic, from Allah. It was, I admit, a beautiful concept; the intent of the holiday was to share one’s good fortune with others. While I loved the whole idea of the celebration, there was that slaughter part that really got to me.
For a week before EID, open-backed trucks of sheep and goats, cows and chickens were carted off to their final destination. They bleated and mooed and otherwise cried out their new situation tied, as they were, to the rails of all manner of trucks. Driving behind them, I watched the animals shift and shake with every speed bump and quick stop. Help us, their eyes seemed to plead. But there were too many to save. All over the city, people prepared by purchasing animals and stoking open-air fires of sweet wood and charcoal. Since EID was the holiest of days, men were asked to sacrifice by allowing their hair and nails to grow for ten days before the celebration began. No shaving. No haircuts. Not even a trim. Children practiced parts in plays that would be performed for parents in school day celebrations, and mothers and sisters and aunties spent time in shops purchasing new clothes for their families.
“EID Mubarak (Blessed EID),” the mysterious woman of the previous night’s phone call said from her car window.
“EID Mubarak,” I said in return from the safety of mine.
“Follow. Yes?” she asked, and I shook my head.
When we arrived at the home of her family, we waited for the large wrought iron gates of
gold and black filigree to open. Inside the family compound, her sisters and nieces had stripped off their abayas and veils and were wearing long silk gowns with gold and pearls. It was like a night club scene with men in ties and tails and women in silk, except there were no men. Each woman kissed me. Right cheek. Left cheek. Right cheek again.
47

“Salaam (Peace),” they said.
“Wa aulaikum salaam (And to you peace),” I responded awkwardly and in bad Arabic. As soon as the formalities of greeting were finished, they led me to the family dining
room and began to feed me. They ate little; I was expected to eat more. “No like?” they would ask if I refused. I ate, so I would not offend my hosts, and even though I never drink coffee, cup after tiny cup of the Arabian kind was poured for me. “Drink,” they encouraged, and I did. After the eighth or ninth cup, one woman told me if I did not shake the cup, I was asking for a refill. Before I set the tiny white porcelain cup on the table, I shook it. I really shook it.
The sisters—six of them—tattooed my hands and arms with henna. They lit Arabian incense and bathed me in it, sprayed me with the famous Arabian perfume, Oud, and then fed me more. After some time of such devoted attention from them, I began to worry I was either about to be married or I was about to be sacrificed. Either was a distinct possibility. While there was constant chatter among them, I could only smile in return. I did not understand Arabic.
When we all spilled into the yard to see the slaughter of eleven goats, the women donned their abayas and veils and giggled excitedly about what was to come. I excused myself by kissing the women goodbye. Right cheek. Left cheek. Right cheek again. I thought it might be rude to spoil a religious holiday by getting sick in their back yard, and I left without making eye contact with the eleven condemned goats. After that first EID, I made the decision to spend subsequent EIDs away from our new home in Ras al Khaimah.
One of the best parts about living in the UAE was that the world opened up, became instantly accessible and truly multicultural, not just because so many expats from all over the world lived their lives together but also because Dubai was a transportation hub in the middle of
48

the world. For the first time in my life, I had easy access to Africa and Asia, Europe and the countries of the Middle East, and I took advantage of it. In the months following our first EID, Collin and I traveled to Kathmandu in Nepal, and our understanding of the world exploded because of the time we spent with this humble, happy people.
“Where’re we going next?” Collin asked as we boarded the plane in Nepal on our way back to Dubai.
By the time EID rolled around again, I had already decided to pick a destination we would never have considered without having first moved to the Middle East. I chose Oman, a country that borders the UAE, Saudi, and Yemen, and settled on The Golden Tulip, a four-star hotel from which to stage our time in the new country.
Collin and I arrived in Oman late in the evening. The lobby of The Golden Tulip had an old-fashioned feel awash in dark woods and green velvets and brass accents. The long, heavy oak desk had a carved brass braid on its front and old-time key boxes to its rear. There was an English style phone booth, an old-school cage elevator with an operator, and clunky brass keys to the rooms. We were delighted. Until we got to our room, that is. Four nights, I thought. We can make it four nights. I forced myself to look down rather than allow Collin to read my panicked thoughts. He was already keen to move on.
Two single beds connected by a shared head board were the focal point of the room. Both beds had mattress look-a-likes covered by threadbare faded yellow throws with tulip appliques. It was clear from my first assessment that the only relationship the mattresses at The Golden Tulip had to actual mattresses was the rectangular shape and standard width. At the foot of the almost linked beds was a sitting area of sorts. Two towels sat folded on a little wooden table in front of a dingy, partially upholstered armchair which, in turn, rested in front of the dirty orangey-gold
49

curtains. Collin picked up one of the towels; while spotlessly clean, there were more holes than towel, and the threads barely held the fading pieces together.
Now I was the kind of traveler who was not fussy; instead, I was content with clean. I was also not the kind of traveler who gathered up the little giveaways to take home with me, but I counted on the basics to save space in my suitcase. As I continued the inspection of the Golden Tulip, I did not find the mini bottle of shampoo. Or conditioner. There was no hand cream, and no little pack of q-tips and cotton balls. There was nothing, in fact. Not even toilet paper. Collin followed me down to the front desk where I inquired about the hotel essentials.
“Hello, ma’am,” the man at the desk greeted me.
“Hello” I began, trying to match his enthusiasm, but falling far short, “do you have a little bottle of shampoo and conditioner? And a roll of toilet paper?”
“No,” he answered without follow-up.
This was not the answer I expected.
“What?” I asked.
“No,” he repeated, looking at me as if I could not understand English. “No toilet paper?”
He pointed to the main door of the hotel, “you can find what you need at Lulu’s.”
I turned in the direction of his pointing finger. Lulu’s was a large catch-all supermarket, a sort of Pakistani Walmart. The actual name was Lulu Hypermarket, a bad translation, I guessed, of supermarket. As I returned my gaze to the man at the desk and away from Lulu’s, he was able to perfectly read my emotions and quickly called out to the bellman in Hindi who moved just as quickly to a closet around the corner where he found a half roll of toilet paper. He handed it to the man at the desk who, in turn, handed it to me triumphantly.
50

“Thank you.”
“My pleasure, ma’am. Is there anything else I can do for you?”
I walked away, shaking my head and carrying the single half roll of toilet paper. I was too
tired to do anything else.
“I’m hungry,” Collin whispered.
We took the elevator to the fifth floor restaurant, ordered vegetarian noodles which the
waiters, in turn, had delivered from another restaurant, and fought to stay awake at the table. My mind had already begun to calculate the cost of changing hotels. It was all a guess, of course, because there was no Wi-Fi at the hotel. A place without shampoo or toilet paper really should not be expected to have Wi-Fi. But for the night, we would stay at the Golden Tulip. Both Collin and I were much too tired after a full day of work, school, and travel to cope with finding a place in a strange, foreign city. Like Scarlett O’Hara in Gone with the Wind, I adopted the attitude of tomorrow is another day and resigned myself to sleeping in the substandard twin beds.
As I washed up for bed, Collin called to me, “mom?”
The tone of his voice and the tentative nature with which he called made it clear something was not right. I left the bathroom to face his inquiry.
“Mom, there’re no sheets on my bed.”
I pulled down the faded yellow quasi-quilt on my own bed to reveal the same. I looked up at Collin, not quite able to make sense of the implications of what he had discovered.
“No sheets?” I asked.
Collin noticed the dark storm moving across my face. This was the mom he knew would get results, not the too polite one of less than an hour before. As I moved towards the door, Collin followed, grabbing the big, oversized brass key to the room.
51

“Good evening, ma’am,” the man at the front desk said.
“There are no sheets on the bed,” I said flatly.
“Right,” he responded cheerfully.
I looked at Collin, the storm brewing on my face. While I spoke the next words to my
son, they were clearly meant for the man at the desk.
“That’s not the answer I expected,” I said in mock glee to Collin. “I suppose I’ll be going
to Lulu’s to buy sheets now, too. Should I get bottled water for the shower while I’m there? What do you think?”
“Mom,” Collin tried to temper the rising tempest. “Ma’am?” the man at the front desk asked.
I turned my steely gaze to him.
“Ma’am?” he asked again.
I raised my eyes to his question, showing him clearly that his next words were important. “I’ll send someone up to your room right away,” he said, nodding to the bellman.
The bellman moved quickly in the opposite direction while Collin and I moved towards
the lobby elevator.
“Thank you,” I said through clenched teeth. “Thank you.”
We slept fitfully on the clean, but tattered sheets that provided only the thinnest layer
over the rock-hard mattresses. The sound of bleating sheep flooded the night air, loud and uncomfortably close. We would find, when the sun came up, that The Golden Tulip sat across the street from a slaughterhouse which shared a parking lot with Lulu Hypermarket. It was a busy place. Stunned customers traveled back and forth from The Golden Tulip for travel size shampoos and conditioners, creams, cotton balls, and q-tips. In addition, taxis and minivans and
52

trucks drove up, parked, paid, and drove away with a sheep or a goat or the occasional cow tied in the trunk, sometimes in the back seat of a taxi. It was EID after all.
“Let’s go,” I said to Collin after watching the comings and goings in the Lulu parking lot. We left The Golden Tulip and settled into the Best Western. So very American of us.
For subsequent EIDs, Collin and I chose our destinations more carefully and avoided the mostly Muslim countries around the UAE. After our EID in Oman, for example, we chose to visit Greece for the next one. When we checked into our hotel, we saw no signs of an active slaughterhouse and were, quite frankly, relieved. The lamb that stuffed pitas and was baked into moussaka served to the tables around us bore little relation to those with the wild, terrified eyes we had seen in the backs of trucks and in the parking lot of Lulu’s Hypermarket. It was a much- improved change from our previous EIDs.
Over the years I spent in the Middle East, I would travel to the most exotic places including a little church in Ethiopia that held an original Leonard da Vinci in a small wooden box and to a church in the mountains of Cyprus where unknown masters covered the interior walls with beautifully haunting, time-faded frescoes. Collin and I would walk the grounds of the Delphi Oracle and spend time moving among the enormous columns of Amun Re; we learned the history of the Karnak Temple in Luxor first hand. I would travel to Kenya to go on safari and to Tanzania to visit Slave Island off the coast of Zanzibar. Katlyn and I would hike the Great Wall of China, stand over the terracotta soldiers, and trek to the highest palace in the world in Tibet. And the three of us would dip our toes in the dirty, but storied Jordan River before riding camels onto the main street of Petra’s colossal carve-outs from the rose-colored rock.
53

And in each place, we gave a little of our own bounty to gain a little of the bounty from those who lived in these faraway lands and from those who willingly shared their histories with us. Like EID, travel came with blessings.
54

Bing Crosby Rode Shotgun
During my daily two-hour commute into the city of Dubai, Bing Crosby showed up and rode shotgun; together, we turned the heads of our fellow traffic-bound travelers with our rendition of White Christmas. Classic. After belting out the song with the car windows down— even the whistling part—Bing left, and Nat King Cole dropped by for his rendition of The Christmas Song. I added my own special touch to the beginning—Chet’s nuts roasting on an open fire—but kept most of the rest of the song intact. Later, when the Carpenter’s showed up with their timeless classic I’ll Be Home for Christmas, they busted the mood by making my heart ache for family and friends. Bad Carpenters! Bad! “Al hamdulillah (Thank God),” I said when the more upbeat Jingle Bells followed and the festive atmosphere in the car was restored.
As the radio-blasting Christmas concert took over the interior of the little red Nissan in a sea of white and pearl and silver cars on the Sheikh Mohammad bin Zayed Road, the Muslim call to prayer filled the airwaves outside. A long sonorous Allah filled the blue skies that capped a glorious 78-degree day. No snow was in the forecast for a Christmas in Dubai. Sorry Bing. It would be a tan Christmas even in a desert winter. While I sang and the sun shone, the biggest Christmas tree in the world was being decorated with the most expensive decorations of diamonds and rubies and emeralds in the center of the biggest mall in the world. The Dubai Mall was right next to the tallest building in the world—the Burj Khalifa which had already sunk a foot below the surface because of its weight on the unstable sand that makes up the desert floor. Still, even with the sinking, it had not lost its title. And despite being in a Muslim country, the Christmas celebration would be the greatest, at least as far as the Emiratis were concerned. Gifts were being bought and wrapped and houses were being decorated. Only in Dubai would such contrasts in cultures come comfortably together.
55

My own mini-inside-the-car celebration during my third year in the UAE reminded me of my first Christmas in the Middle East when I was just learning what it meant to be far from family and friends during the most wonderful time of the Christian year. I was feeling down, homesick, a bit put out during that first Christmas. As the principal of an Emirati school, I was expected to work on Christmas Day. After all, in a Muslim country, December 25th was just another day. A Tuesday, in fact. And while I dutifully showed up to work, most of my Muslim colleagues took the day off. They assumed that most of the Western Christian administrators would do the same. They were wrong.
One Emirati, the guidance counselor, showed up for work a few hours late after having a long late breakfast, coffee, and sheesha with his mates. At least he showed up to work though. When he saw I was in the building, he dropped by. I suppose he felt sorry for me sitting at my desk on Christmas day.
Easa was one of my favorites at the school; he was fair, but firm with the students and kind to his colleagues. He was smart and funny and always asking questions. His name, moreover, was the Arabic form of Jesus, so it seemed particularly fitting that he wanted to talk about a Christian holiday on the exact holiday that feted the birth of his namesake.
“What about this Christmas thing?” he asked as he plopped down in a chair opposite my desk.
“What about it?” I asked.
My Arab colleagues had recognized my openness to all things spiritual, something they really respected. Since I also readily accepted their religious practices, they had begun to see me as someone who might answer their long-held questions about Westerners. And Christians. Over the months, they had carefully, tentatively begun to ask. Easa’s blunt request to understand “this
56

Christmas thing,” however, was an interesting turning point, and I welcomed it, not for any religious purpose or intent, but because I believed it meant he trusted me enough to ask. That was a big breakthrough in the Emirates.
“Jesus was born in the spring,” Easa began, gently breaking the news to me.
He raised his eyes, checking to see if he had gone too far, wondering if he had offended me. He had not. “I know,” I answered, but he did not take notice to my response. Instead, he had already pushed on, laying out evidence, hoping to lessen the sting of his revelation.
“There are evidences,” he said breathlessly; “in the Quran. And the Bible, too.”
Instead of waiting for my response, he began to list the clues—the vegetation, the time of the census in Bethlehem, the position of the star. And when he was finished, he crowned his argument with the affirmation: “So Jesus wasn’t born on Christmas.” He looked at me side-eyed to see what effect his argument had on me. I surprised him.
“I know,” I said simply.
Easa’s eyes widened in astonishment, in amazement. “You know?” he asked.
“Yeah. It was a pagan holiday, December 25th. The church wanted them to believe, so
they took over the holiday.”
“And?” Easa asked suspiciously.
“And it stuck,” I answered honestly.
“The contradiction doesn’t bother you?” he asked.
“Nope.”
“Because?” Easa asked, unable to formulate a full question.
“Because it’s not about the day, Easa; it’s about the message he brought to the world.
Jesus, I mean. The actual day doesn’t matter.”
57

“Christians are strange,” Easa said, rolling his eyes.
Our conversation taught me the difference between how Arabs and Westerners communicate. Arabs seek out contradictions and provide evidence—or evidences, as they say it—to refute any illogical fallacies; they use this knowledge, then, to prove their own thoughts and ideas. Westerners, on the other hand, accept contradictions as a way to build truth by questioning basic premises. Think Sophocles, for example. Like the Arabs, we provide evidence, but we do not use the evidence to refute the full argument. Parts of it, yes, but not the whole thing. Especially when it comes to religion.
The fundamental difference between the two groups accounts for a great deal of misinformation and misunderstanding. In conversation, feelings on both sides are often hurt as Arabs search out the gotcha moment and Westerners get defensive and fight back with words meant to hurt. Easa’s brave discussion, however, helped me recognize the difference in communication styles fairly early on in my tenure, giving me my first Christmas present in the Middle East. A Christmas present from Easa. Jesus in Arabic. Cool, huh?
Our rapport had emboldened him to discuss something about which he was genuinely concerned, something about which he had a duty to me to explore. He believed I had based my religious choices on incomplete information, and as a friend, he was duty-bound to complete the picture for me. In other words, he was obliged to point out the contradictions. He was expected to provide the evidence to knock down the paradoxes, and he did it because he wanted to be true to our friendship. It was a sign of respect, in other words. I learned not to be defensive about his obligations. They came from his heart. They were a requirement of his culture and religion. My only obligation was to listen with an open mind and accept his gift. By not attacking, Easa and I communicated. Really communicated.
58

“Thanks for telling me, Easa,” I said.
“You are a true Muslim,” he replied reverently, my second gift of the day. “I am your brother now,” he vowed.
The word Muslim literally means one who submits to God, and a true Muslim does not need to be a practitioner of Islam. In Easa’s understanding, I submitted to God’s will even if I chose to worship him differently, making me a true Muslim though not a practitioner of Islam. Calling me a true Muslim was Easa’s way of offering me acceptance and kinship, and it was a title not offered without great thought and deliberation of my character.
In doing so, however, Easa reminded me that Christmas is not about Bing Crosby or the Carpenters, decorated evergreens or lavish presents. It was about learning how to accept and re- gift Jesus’ true gifts to humankind: to love our neighbors and to treat them as we would want to be treated. Whether you believe in Jesus as the incarnation of God or a messenger from God, Christmas is the acknowledgement of the Divine in all humanity, no matter our differences. It is about learning to love one another, to practice tolerance in the face of prejudice, and to accept those whom society condemns with its indifference. Like Jesus did. Like Easa did.
During Christmas, the lessons come packaged in the form of a man, a man like us who happened to be born in the beating heart of the Middle East. His goodness and humility inspired us. Jesus was his name. Easa, in the language of the Arabs. I spent my first Christmas in the Middle East talking to Easa. Beat that, Bing Crosby.
59

Saint or Sinner in the Hallway Light
Backlit by the hallway light, a figure stood at the threshold of my bedroom, not quite in, not quite out. Just a feet away from where I slept. He seemed frozen in place. Featureless. A spray of gold tightly delineated his shape, giving him an odd iridescence, a contrast to the otherwise darkness of his body. A cool winter breeze from the desert blew the curtains in and out, in and out, creating the only movement but breath in the room. The smell of the salty Arabian Gulf entered and exited with the movement of the curtains, and a whispered conversation—Russian, it was—took place in the back yard. In the foggy distance of my awareness, a door—my front door—was being pounded and pierced with heavy iron tools. Seconds ticked by as my not-yet-awakened mind tried to catch up to the menace my body had already recognized. But I was too tired to respond. So I nodded once, rolled over towards the windows and the blowing curtains and the salty smell of the Gulf, and fell back asleep, giving the figure the freedom he needed to move through my bedroom and around the house while my children slept.
If I had been sharper that early morning of New Year’s Day, I would have recognized the opened closet doors, overturned drawers, and shuffled-through clothing scattered on the marble tiles in the room where I slept. I might have considered the incongruity of the whispered conversation—the one in Russian—especially since my back yard was fenced-in with a concrete wall backed up by a meandering moat that snaked around the homes in the little development of expats. If I had been sharper, I might have walked down the darkened steps of my home to see my purse, our passports, my mother’s jewelry sitting in the middle of a table that would be gone the next day. From that vantage point on the stairway, I might have noticed the footprints that marked the top of the concrete wall and muddied the pavers of the patio, I would surely have
60

seen the mud that led from the opened screen doors through the living room and into the kitchen. I might have puzzled at the half-eaten food left on the kitchen counter where the footprints pointed in towards the cabinets before turning out again. And turning with those footprints, I might have seen the men—probably three of them—that emptied our home of valuables as my children slept, vulnerable. But my mind did not process the danger that early, early morning of the new year. I felt safe. I had been told I had nothing to fear. I had been lulled into believing there was no danger in the United Arab Emirates.
“You can leave your wallet on the table and walk away for a week,” a longtime resident told me one afternoon. “And you can come back the next week to find it there,” he said pointing to an imaginary table. And for the most part, his hyperbole had proven true. At one point in my tenure in the UAE, I had even tested his hypothesis. Not on purpose, of course.
“Mom,” Collin called, “where’s the new phone?” “On the table.”
“Nope.”
“By my computer, then.”
“I checked.”
“Purse?”
“No.”
Only the day before, I had purchased the brand new rose-colored Apple iPhone. The big
one. My driver’s license and credit cards and Emirates ID were tucked inside the apple-red case that protected it.
“When’d you see it last?” my son asked.
61

“At McDonald’s. When Fadi called.”
“At breakfast?” Collin asked looking to the clock on the kitchen wall.
Collin was a big fan of eating out. Anytime or all the time, but just not anywhere. My kid
had good taste. But in the UAE, most restaurants were quite good. They had to be, or the government would put the franchise owners and cooks in jail. Food, I found out in the UAE, can taste much better when the threat of incarceration stands between the food and the fryer.
“Mom,” Collin said deliberately slowly, “that was six hours ago. Is it still at McDonald’s?” he asked.
“Get in the car,” I said already moving to the front door.
When we arrived at the restaurant for the crowded late-afternoon rush, my heart sank and my stride slowed. As I held my breath, Collin headed for the counter. A moment later, he held up the phone.
“No one touched it,” he announced.
After the phone episode, I accepted the country’s talking points about safety and began living life without worry. I ran on the steamy Gulf in the early, early morning before the red of the desert sun came up and walked in downtown Dubai after it went down. I left our little villa unlocked as I walked the dog to the click-click-click of the crabs on the saltmarsh. Keys sat on the floor inside the unlocked car while bikes laid exposed in the driveway. And on the night the figure stood aglow in my bedroom, I had invited in the cool evening air by leaving the patio doors wide open even though I had locked the front door. Habit, I guess.
When New Year’s Day dawned sunny-sky blue, my teenage children crawled into bed with me like they did when they were younger. We planned to walk a few blocks to the sandy
62

beaches of the Arabian Gulf where Katlyn wanted to jet ski and sun, and Collin wanted to eat at Trader Vic’s. My new husband was away, visiting with his children for the new year’s celebration, so we had the day to ourselves, the children and me.
“Mom,” Katlyn laughed pointing to my closet, “what’d you do?”
Clothes stretched out across the creamy-colored marble floor; the contents of my silver jewelry box sat scattered on my dresser, and barely visible footprints circled in and circled out around the contents of my life. “Weird,” I said unable to account for the mess. Then, a memory—foggy, to be sure—made its way to my morning mind.
“I think there was an angel in my room last night.” “An angel?” Collin asked.
“Yeah,” I said as I launched into a description. “What’d you do?” Katlyn asked.
“I went back to sleep.”
“You didn’t even talk to it?” she asked, judging my lack of angel courtesy. She did not even consider questioning whether or not I had actually seen an angel.
“I was tired,” I said in my defense.
“I would have talked to it,” Collin said in pseudo-angel-pragmatism.
“Me too,” Katlyn added, rolling her eyes in a she-doesn’t-know-anything-about-angels
kind of way.
“Well, I didn’t,” I responded defensively.
After straightening up the bedroom, I met my children downstairs. They stood, mystified,
looking around our home. Rational thought had not yet caught up with their visual field. The screen doors to the backyard were open as was the refrigerator door, and half-eaten bits of food
63

sat out on the counter and on the floor. There were gaps where furniture had been and muddy footsteps all over the marble-tiled floors; those at the screen doors were particularly thick and muddy while those nearer the kitchen were more phantom-like.
“Mom, someone’s been here,” Collin whispered.
“What the . . .?” Katlyn breathed out.
“My purse!” I yelled, noting its absence from the stair’s wrought-iron post.
“It’s gone,” Collin said.
I sat down on the bottom step of the marble staircase, trying to come up with a coherent
thought, a plausible explanation, a reasonable plan, anything, and the only thing I could think to do was to contact Fadi. Still not fully comprehending the issue, I decided to text my husband; he might still be sleeping.
Someone broke in last night. I’m calling the police. Call me.
I sat on the stairs staring at the screen, waiting for a reply while my children stood staring at me, waiting for a plan.
“Call the police, mom,” Collin instructed, and I did.
When they arrived, the children and I greeted them at the door with obvious relief. The three men—overweight and overstuffed into their khaki green uniforms and berets—looked furtively inside the house for a man. Any man. Their gazes landed on Collin, a lanky 10th grader holding a little shitzu mix. The captain looked at his men and shivered. Dog, they must have thought. Moreover, without a man in the house, they would have to deal with me. A woman.
“A salaam aluaikum (peace be with you),” I greeted them. “Araby?” the first officer asked relieved.
64

I had only been in the country a few months and had not learned enough Arabic to hold even the most cursory of conversations. To be honest, even my basic greetings were a bit shaky. In fact, only a few weeks earlier at work, I had failed miserably when I tried to change-up my usual salutation. “Sabah al hair,” I proudly said in Arabic as two men entered my office. The smiles of the Emirati guidance counselor wrapped in the white kandura and head scarf of his country and the Jordanian head of the Islamic Department dissipated quickly into shock. When they turned on their heels to leave—to escape, really, I called after them: “I meant ‘good morning.’ What did I say?”
I heard Fadi laughing down the hallway; his office was only a few doors from mine. He would have heard my failed attempt. Although he wouldn’t explain my mistake during work hours, later that night, he told me I had said the good part of “good morning” correctly. However, I had incorrectly substituted the vernacular for male genitalia in the place of the morning part of “good morning.” In effect, I had greeted the two men—including the head of the Islamic Department—with the less-than-formal, not at all work-appropriate “Good dick.”
So, in response to the captain’s question regarding whether or not I spoke Arabic, I decided it would be unwise to try, especially since he carried a gun in a holster at his side.
“La (no),” I said firmly in response to his question.
“Araby?” he asked my two children in a desperate attempt to bridge the language divide. “La,” I said again.
The officer turned to his partners and began speaking furiously. I could make out the
Arabic word for English, but as it was spoken, the officers shook their heads no. All of us—me and my children, the chief and his officers—looked at each other across a divide. One of the officers kept speaking to me in Arabic, albeit in a slowed-down version of his normal speech, but
65

Arabic nonetheless. I pointed to the footprints. The officers nodded. I pointed to the empty spaces and gestured the type of furniture that had been there hours earlier. They nodded. And, then, the phone rang. An early morning miracle.
“What happened?” Fadi asked in a rushed, anxious way. “Tell me.”
“Someone broke in,” I responded. “The police are here.”
“What did they say?”
“I don’t know. They don’t speak English,” I said watching the officers watch me. “My
husband,” I told them and showed them the ring on my finger. They shook their heads.
“Tell them zouwzh. It means husband.”
“Zouwzh,” I said, pointing to the phone.
The officers looked at me and, then, at the children.
“Araby?” one officer asked completely flummoxed.
“Put me on speaker,” Fadi yelled over the din.
“What?”
“Speaker. Put me on speaker.”
“He wants to talk,” I said in really slow English as I clicked the speaker on the phone. “A salaam aluaikum,” Fadi greeted the officer.
Visibly relieved, but not yet believing that a really fair-skinned American woman with
really fair-skinned children could have an Arabic husband, the officers chatted back and forth with Fadi while obviously trying to puzzle out our relationship.
“Jackie,” Fadi called through the phone, “tell me what happened.”
66

As I began telling the story, Fadi translated, and the officers nodded. Occasionally, they’d break in with a question, and Fadi would translate it for me. The whole story took much longer than it needed to, but at least we were communicating. When we got to the part about the stranger in my bedroom, I heard an engine cut in the driveway and the echo of our conversation close by. Fadi opened the door, but for some reason, stayed on the phone. The officers were exultant—literally overjoyed—to see someone who looked like them walk through the front door. They shook hands and exchanged greetings in Arabic. One officer slapped Fadi on the back and laughed his way through some kind of congratulatory remark for my husband. They all turned to look at me. Awkward. While Fadi seemed to enjoy the spotlight, I rolled my eyes and sniggered at him. I may not have understood Arabic, but I understood the officer’s meaning.
“They want to know why you didn’t call the police when the man was here,” Fadi said. “I fell back to sleep,” I said.
Fadi looked at me in disbelief; he moved closer to me and away from the officers. “You fell asleep?”
“Yeah.”
“With a man in your room?”
Fadi, I suddenly realized, felt embarrassed in front of the other men. His wife wasn’t
alarmed by a strange man in her bedroom, seemingly solidifying a much-held belief in the Arab community about the looseness of Western women. I looked to the policemen. They were watching our conversation play out with too much interest.
“I thought he was an angel.” “What?” Fadi asked.
“I thought he was an angel.”
67

“You thought he was an angel?” Fadi asked raising his voice.
“Yeah.”
The officers clearly wanted in on Fadi’s new information and asked for clarification. Fadi
continued to stare at me, not in condemnation, but in a way that tried to make sense of what I had just said.
“Arabs believe in angels, too,” I said defensively.
Fadi turned to the officers, “She thought it was an angel,” he said in Arabic.
“Malak?” the chief asked in disbelief.
“Malak,” Fadi nodded.
The four men stood staring at each other, trying to make sense of what Fadi had just said. “Malak?” one officer asked me.
“He wants to know if it was an angel,” Fadi translated for me. “Malak.”
“An angel,” I said, shaking my head emphatically. “Malak.”
“Malak,” Fadi reassured the officer.
I wasn’t sure if the men believed I was a saint or a sinner with my revelation, but they
went about the house cataloging what had been taken. When I took them into the bedroom, I showed them what had happened to my closet and realized, for the first time, that my mother’s jewelry had been taken. The realization hit hard, and I began to cry. The officers understood my angst, and in fact, my response helped them connect with me for the first time all morning.
“He wants to know if the angel did this,” Fadi said, nodding to the chief.
“It had to be him,” I responded.
The chief had a visible response to what Fadi had translated. He turned and looked at his
officers who looked at me in fear. “What?” I asked, but no one answered. Instead, the chief had a
68

serious conversation with Fadi, pointing out the areas of my room that had been ransacked. Al hamdulillah (Thank God), Fadi muttered with each officer’s statements. Al hamdulillah, the other officers mimicked Fadi. And for the first time, the chief’s face softened. He spoke directly to me while Fadi, teary-eyed, translated.
“He says Allah blessed you this morning by showing you an angel, not a criminal. He saved you from . . .”.
But Fadi could not finish. The officers put their arms on his shoulders and comforted him. They shook their heads no when Fadi, obviously with some guilt, began a long stream of Arabic. From time to time, they shot glances at me. Then, turned their gazes back to him.
“He could have . . .” Fadi tried again, but could not finish.
And it finally dawned on me what could have happened. I finally recognized the danger I did not understand in the very early, early morning of New Year’s Day. Instead, I saw an angel and rolled over without threatening the thief in my home. I did not call out or travel down the steps to see the others. And because I did not, the police chief surmised, I survived.
“Malak,” the chief nodded at me, finally believing. “Al hamdulillah,” he said.
“Al hamdulillah,” I repeated, my eyes misting with the thought of what might have been.
Later that New Year’s Day, the doorbell rang. I opened the door to a young man in the native dress of Emiratis who stood on the front porch. There was something about him, a feel, a confidence that marked him as someone special
“A salaam aluaikum,” he said reaching his hand out to me.
I hesitated before I shook his hand. In the Middle East, most Muslim men do not shake the hands of women, especially Western women. After only four months, I had submitted to
69

what was normal in the Gulf, forgetting the more than 40 years of my own experiences. “Please, come in,” I said.
“Coffee?” Fadi asked.
“I will not take your time,” the man said in perfect American English; “I am Saqr, the nephew of Sheikh Saud, and he has sent me in his name.”
Both Fadi and I stood speechless. The king had sent his nephew, not much older than my own children. Saqr nodded at the kids and smiled. Katlyn waved a tiny shy wave back at him.
“There is no need,” Fadi finally found his voice.
“But there is,” the young man urged in response. “This is our country, and you,” he nodded at me, “have been hurt by our negligence.”
“Thank you” I mumbled weakly.
“The king wants to make it right. We have several available homes.”
“But I have a contract,” I said.
“Jackie,” Fadi whispered and shook his head no. Apparently, I was not doing a good job
speaking to a member of a royal family. In my defense, it was my first time.
“You are not safe here,” he said. “Your dog,” he nodded to the small shitzu mix in my
son’s arm, “did not bark.”
For the first time, I realized Doodles had not, in fact, alerted us to the intruders in our
home. He had not barked or growled or shown any signs of unrest when the strangers invaded. “Strange,” I said mostly to myself.
“We think the men have been coming here often. Your dog knew them. He did not bark.” “Oh my God,” I said; “when I sleep?”
70

“When you’re at work. The maids, we think. We are questioning them. Anyway, for your safety, you must move. We have already addressed the issue with your landlord.”
I looked around at the little house close to the Arabian Gulf: the sunny back yard, the wall that was supposed to keep us safe, and the man-made moat that ran the length of our street. I looked to the fruit trees in the yard I had just planted and above them, to the golf course that laid just behind the moat. My attention moved through the screen doors back inside to the marble floors and staircase, the well-appointed bathrooms, the newly remodeled kitchen. Saqr read my thoughts.
“You are not safe here,” he said and turning to Fadi, added, “you must tell her.”
Fadi shook his hand; Saqr handed him his card. “Call me when you have found a home.” “Of course,” Fadi said; “Shukran (Thank you).”
“Do you have time to sign your statement at the police station?” Saqr asked me.
“Now?” I asked looking at Fadi.
“Yes,” Fadi answered.
A few minutes later, Fadi and I sat at the captain’s desk at the Al Hamra Police Station.
Saqr stood in the corner, and some of the officers ducked their heads in the room to see the tall, proud Palestinian man who had married the American woman. “Al hamdulillah,” they said to each other. I rolled my eyes.
The captain set out the complaint in front of me. “Malak?” he asked Fadi, laughing. “Malak,” I answered as I raised my eyebrow in snark at the captain.
Fadi stomped on my foot and whispered, “This is not America. Be careful.”
“Read. If it’s right, sign,” the captain of the Al Hamra Police Station said. Then, before I
could finish reading, the captain began laughing.
71

“What?” I asked, waiting for another joke about angels.
“You’re number one,” he said as he sat back in his chair laughing. “Number one. Number one,” he chanted, holding up his index finger as if he were a fan at a soccer stadium.
I looked to Fadi for clarity.
“You’re number one,” the captain said again. Then, to the others in the room, “She’s number one.”
Everyone laughed. “Number one; number one!” they chanted. When I shrugged my shoulders, the captain pushed the file folder towards us. There on the cover was the case number. “Number one in the UAE,” he laughed, tapping the file number and, then, pointing at me.
“I’m number one?” I asked tentatively and the place exploded in laughter.
Saqr stepped in, “You are case number one for the UAE. He thinks it’s funny,” he said side-eyeing the captain. The captain took heed of the royal warning.
“You will be number one to us. We will find the bad men,” the captain assured me in a newly serious tone.
“Shukran (thank you),” I said standing up.
As Fadi and I walked down the hallway and out to the parking lot, we could hear the officers chanting. “Number one; number one!”
“I’m number one,” I smiled at Fadi as we got into the car. “Al hamdulillah,” he said in relief.
72

Sometimes a Girl Just Needs a Good Cry
“Oh! I don’t know, Rashida,” I said laughing; “maybe my children or parents deserved to know first.”
Seconds after my snarky response, I recognized the mistake. Too late. The air in the little meeting room was sucked up by a collective gasp. Silence took over as Rashida’s blood pressure soared and spiraled out of control. The kohl-lined corner flourish of her twitchy right eye marked the flashing and flittering of her thoughts, and an uneasy smile that had rested uneasily on her pinched face disappeared; in its place, a cyclone of emotions—none of them good—seemed ready to submerge me in some kind of sustained suffering. Around the table, heads dropped, fingers table-tapped timidly, and Rashida’s tempest gathered storm. “I should have been the first person you asked before you married,” she had declared. I thought she was joking and replied in kind, setting off a cultural hand grenade in the middle of the meeting room. I had offended and embarrassed her in front of her colleagues by having the unmitigated audacity to question her authority. How dare she? Rashida must have thought. In the Arab world, the boss was always, always right. Even when she was not.
“Rashida,” I began in an attempt to soothe the misstep.
She cut me off with a curt wave of her chubby hand. Although she was unable to form words, they would come eventually, and I would be held accountable for the cultural misunderstanding for the rest of my tenure in the school system.
Just a bit over six weeks earlier, Fadi and I stood in front of a Jordanian judge from the UAE royal court and asked permission to marry. Marriage was not automatic, and Fadi worried the judge would deny our petition. Since all judges were versed in both temporal and spiritual
73

law, their reliance on Allah in their rulings added a weighty feeling to their findings. While the Emiratis punished the temporal breaches with impunity, folks in the UAE were much more worried about being held accountable in front of Allah than being held indefinitely in a desert jail. What’s a life compared to eternity? they thought. So when Fadi and I were asked to sign an agreement that was half legal and half religious, we signed our names aware of its solemn significance. As the judge considered whether to agree to our marriage, he questioned whether the love we felt for each other got in the way of making a prudent match.
“Why would love . . .” I began to question the judge.
Fadi interrupted me by placing his hand over mine. It was haram (sinful) to question the judge’s authority, he told me. It was another cultural expectation I had not yet learned. The judge understood my need to know, however, and responded good-naturedly despite my interruption. His words were filtered through a court-appointed translator and, when necessary, Fadi.
“I worry for Fadi,” the judge continued and the translator translated.
Again, I looked to Fadi. My thoughts were consumed with patriarchy as I tried hard to understand the judge’s words through my American lens. Later, I would learn the judge’s decree was meant to give us a chance to get to know each other before making our marriage public.
“I will marry you,” the judge declared.
“He’s going to marry us,” Fadi exhaled.
He had been holding his breath for the judge’s announcement, and his body softened as
the judge finally uttered the words.
“But you will not live together for two months.” “What?” I asked the translator, not the judge. “Honey, shhh,” Fadi said, “let him speak.”
74

“You can meet alone. You will be husband and wife, but you will tell no one about the marriage for these two months.”
Although I did not say a word, the question was clear in my eyes.
“It will be a trial period,” the judge continued, and I noticed I was the only one in the room that found his pronouncement odd. “After the two months,” he said, “if you still love each other and want to remain married, you are free to do as you like.”
When he finished, he gestured for Fadi to explain it to me.
“He thinks we’re too different,” Fadi began.
“Fadi, I don’t . . .”.
“It’s another culture, Jackie,” he said cutting me off. “He’s trying to do the right thing.” “He wants to take care of you,” I mumbled caught up in my argument of patriarchy. Fadi laughed. Then, leaned in, “Do you love me?” he asked.
I shook my head in reply.
“Say it,” he asked gently.
“You know I love you,” I said.
Fadi smiled. “He’s worried,” Fadi nodded to the judge, “our love is blinding us to what
might be a difficult marriage. You’re Christian; I’m Muslim. You don’t speak Arabic, and you don’t know our ways. He is giving us a way to see if a marriage can work.”
“So he’ll marry us in two months?”
“No, tomorrow.”
In a good-natured gesture, the judge agreed to meet Fadi and me and our witnesses in his
home the next day. I needed proof of my father’s consent despite the fact I was in my late 40s, and since it was the middle of the night in the US, I did not want to phone him. Unfortunately,
75

the next day was Friday. Since it is considered a holy day in Islam, the courts would be closed, and Fadi and I would have to wait another week. In lieu of waiting, the judge offered to meet us after Juma (Friday prayers).
“But we can’t tell anyone?” I asked Fadi.
“No.”
“And then we get divorced if we want?” I asked.
“He will break the agreement and nobody will know. We will not be embarrassed,” Fadi
explained. “Honey,” he said as all the men in the room watched, “people here marry without knowing each other. Their parents or . . .”
“An arranged marriage,” I interrupted and rolled my eyes.
“Their parents or brothers make the terms,” Fadi finished his sentence.
“An arranged marriage, right?” I asked again.
“Yes. So the marriage is fixed before . . .”.
“But they don’t love each other,” I interrupted again.
“I know, honey, but it’s not normal here. He’s trying to help us,” Fadi explained. “Does she agree?” the judge asked impatiently. “It is binding.”
Fadi looked at me, eyes raised. When I shook my head yes, he responded to the judge,
“Nam (yes),” he said. “Al hamdulillah (thank God).”
At the time of the meeting when Rashida asked her question, Fadi and I were within two weeks of being able to announce our marriage. We had planned it for Valentine’s Day, the wedding anniversary of my parents, and we discussed the trays of chocolate we would buy to mark the occasion. In the Arab world, it was the celebrant who brought gifts, not the other way
76

around. Bottles of wine and whiskey and the occasional Bailey’s were saved for dinners at the places of ex-pats; chocolate was the go-to gift in Muslim circles. And stores dedicated to the over-the-top displays of sweets did a robust business in the UAE. There were presents intended for back-to-school and birthdays and celebrating engagements, for weddings and welcomes and for the commemoration of comings and goings. There were golden-tiered towers where chocolate exploded in fountain-like arrangements and silver meat trays with mountains of individually-wrapped blue and silver confections. Intricately gift-wrapped boxes of three or four pieces—only sixty dirhams each—shared space with the thousands dirham displays in colorful hand-blown crystal containers. There was milk chocolate and white chocolate and the very dark kind. There were some chocolates with sticky fillings; others had nuts. For a few extra dirhams, the chocolate stores offered coolers for customers, certifying the survival of the chocolate when leaving the store for the desert heat.
“Rashida,” I tried again, but this time instead of a curt wave, a tsunami of insults spilled from her mouth.
When I emerged from the little meeting room at the school in Ras al Khaimah, I was stoic, but shaken. I had seen my share of cruelty from supervisors, but I had never seen the type of histrionic, high-pitched, arm-waving, self-pitying display I had seen from Rashida. My marriage to Fadi somehow diminished her stature among her peers. I did not understand how, but I knew my alliance with Fadi had somehow ended the one between Rashida and me.
A few weeks after the meeting at the school, I was summoned to Abu Dhabi at the other end of the country to hear her decree on the matter of my marriage. While I arrived early, Rashida kept me waiting more than two hours until, of course, the late afternoon traffic was at its
77

worst; that way, I would spend at least five hours snaking my way back to Ras al Khaimah in the stop and start traffic around Dubai. On that night, it was mostly stopped traffic in Dubai.
“I read the evaluations from your campus,” she launched into the meeting without a welcome.
Since greetings were an essential part of an Arab conversation, I understood the lack of one as a purposeful slight. As an American, however, I did not care. I had spent the last few weeks hearing rumors about me emanating from Rashida’s office, and no greeting could ameliorate the impact her ugliness had had on me.
“Your campus hates you,” she said, nodding to Miss Fatima, the Emirati HR representative in the room.
“No, they don’t,” I said calmly despite the bubbling, bilious, burping anxiety in the pit of my stomach.
Rashida did not take kindly to my rebuke. But I had been warned about this type of attack. Many of my colleagues had emailed their evaluations to me; although I was uncomfortable with the practice, the members of the school community assumed Rashida would use them as a way to hurt me. If I had them, she could not.
“Yes, they do! And the students hate you too!” she screamed.
“No, they don’t,” I replied even more confidently, even more calmly. I looked to Miss Fatima who had dropped her head to smile. Nobody corrected Rashida. Nobody.
“And all the principals and vice principals hate you too!” Rashida screamed in a barely controlled screed.
I shook my head no. Miss Fatima took a deep breath and waited. “Everybody hates you!” Rashida screamed in her Lebanese-laced English.
78

Again, I shook my head in response, but I knew I was playing with fire. Rashida did not like to be contradicted. Regardless of the truth, if she said X, everyone was expected to say X. But I had spent years with bullies, and I knew saying X might be easier in the moment, but in the long run, it would make my work life miserable. I was betting on the long run with my polite, yet firm replies.
“I was the only one who didn’t hate you!” she roared.
At one level, I analyzed the ridiculous argument she was making and wanted to laugh. Even she had to know it was ridiculous; at another, more surface level, however, her temper terrorized me. I could see why grown men often left her office in tears.
In her anger-induced shaking hands, Rashida tried to negotiate a pretty porcelain cup and saucer of tea; they were meant as part of the assault on me. In Arab society, the fact that she did not offer tea while she, herself, drank it was another insult. I did not care. I was not Arab, and I was not thirsty. The cup and saucer clinked against each other as punctuation for her words, and they offered me an escape to the escalating pitch and power of her increasing madness. She looked childish, if not churlish.
“I’m glad you don’t hate me,” I smiled through fear.
“I didn’t say I didn’t hate you!”
“Well, I don’t hate you,” I said and Miss Fatima moved her chair ever-so-slightly from
Rashida’s side. “Rashida,” I began, “I’m sorry, but I don’t understand why this has erupted into such a problem. I married Fadi. Khalas (finished),” I said, switching to Arabic for emphasis.
“You will not speak! You will not say a word! You are dead in my eyes!” she said, jumping up from her chair.
79

She threw the cup and saucer on the table next to her. Literally threw them. The teacup teetered off its perch, and the contents spilled onto her desk. The look in her eyes said it was my fault. I stayed quiet, however; instead of lodging a complaint against her eye accusation, I was too scared to speak. I slowed my breathing, crossed my legs, and sat back in my chair.
“Rashida, you do not have the right to scream at me,” I said and her heretofore good- natured ways—at least for Rashida—came to an end in the ensuing storm of insults.
When she finished—and it took a while—she told me I would be transferred to the “worst school in the system.” She made it clear that I would feel the pain of my betrayal of her. She had, she said, “such great hopes for me.” I calculated a response but stayed silent instead.
“You know how to run a school. You could have been someone important. Instead, you married a Muslim. A Palestinian, too,” she spat at me.
And there it was, the clarification I had been seeking. Rashida was a Christian from Lebanon. She hated Muslims, and she hated the Palestinians whom, she believed, had invaded her country. In a school system ruled by Muslim educators in a Muslim country, Rashida had counted on me—a Christian woman—to help her counter what she could not abide. I looked to Miss Fatima who looked shocked, but remained silent. Later, I would write a letter to her, citing Rashida’s racist comments, but she maintained her silence in the formal system. Miss Fatima, however, told the story to the other Emirati women, and one-by-one, they began to accept me into their confidences in a way that Western women rarely experienced. Not long after my meeting with Rashida, I began receiving invitations to Emirati weddings; this was the way they showed their respect for my courage and for my acceptance of a Muslim husband. When the Emirati women chose to sit by me in all system-wide meetings, it galled Rashida.
80

When I left Rashida’s office after the insult-driven slur slugfest, I headed out to the car and called Fadi. The breath that had been trapped inside burst through bringing tears. In a matter of seconds, I spilled out the whole story.
“She said everybody hates me!” I cried.
“Nobody hates you,” he said missing the point.
“I know!” I responded, a little frustrated.
“Calm down,” he crooned; “you need to drive.”
“FADI!” I yelled into the phone; “she was awful, abusive!”
“Allah will deal with her, honey,” Fadi said sincerely. “Let Allah do His work.”
“Fadi,” I sucked in breath to regain some sense of calm, “I know Allah will deal with her.
I believe that. But I’m human. Can I have a few minutes to cry and feel bad before I have to be strong again? Just a few minutes?”
A few weeks later, I said good-bye to friends and colleagues in Ras al Khaimah and headed to a new school in Ajman where a big, blustery Englishman—one hated and harassed by Rashida—presided over the school as principal. Keith had a thick, thick Manchester accent, so in order to understand him, I had to listen to him in the same way I listened to those who spoke Arabic. His English, in other words, was more like a second language to me than not, and in those first few weeks, Keith and I had lots of misunderstandings. My difficulty with his English, however, bound me to the Arabs who had the same problem. They would shake their heads and raise their eyes in sympathy every time I asked Keith to repeat himself.
Rashida, in the meantime, tried to strike a bargain with me on my sixth day in the new school building. She headed into my glass-fronted office with the white leather furniture and
81

plopped herself into one of the club chairs in front of my desk. I was still stinging from the move to the new school and her constant harassment, so I was caught off-guard by the wide grin and sweet, smooth words that came from her mouth.
“So, how do you like Ajman?” she asked.
“It’s okay,” I replied hesitantly, “you know, after six days and all.”
“And how do you like Keith?”
I knew this was a loaded question, so I treaded carefully, “We’re getting along.” “He’s a terrible principal,” she leaned over in a display of confidence.
“Hm,” I replied.
“Would you like to go back to Ras al Khaimah?” she asked, sitting back in her chair. “Of course.”
“Well, do me a favor, and I’ll see what I can do,” she said conspiratorially.
I raised my eyebrows in response, and Rashida moved in.
“You tell me everything Keith does—wrong or right—and I will reward you,” she
whispered.
“Rashida,” I said, “are you asking me to spy on the principal?”
“Call it what you want,” she said sitting back in her chair.
For a few minutes, I thought about how to reply. “Rashida,” I began as she propped her
elbows on my desk, a wide smile on her face, “thank you for the offer.”
“You do for me,” she said waving my gratitude away; “and I’ll do for you.”
“But I cannot spy on Keith,” I finished my sentence. “Or anyone else for that matter. It
wouldn’t be good for the school you hired me to run.”
82

For a second, Rashida was stunned speechless. No one had ever refused her. The alternative to what she offered would mean my ruin. I knew this even as I considered my answer. But I held the trust of my colleagues, and I feared the day she would make the offer to someone else about me. Eventually she would; it was the way she worked.
Rashida erupted. Coworkers and students lined the hallway outside my office to watch the spectacle. I could see them through the glass walls of the office; Rashida could not. Some of the teachers clenched their fists in a show of support for me; others slunk away in fear of Rashida’s fury. Keith, who shared a wall with my office, sat behind his desk and listened for a while. He had already assumed Rashida would make the offer; she had been trying to get him to quit ever since he contradicted her in front of her boss. He had also assumed I would accept. But he was pleasantly surprised when I did not, and after a few minutes of listening to her outburst, he left his office. In a loud, blustery, Manchester-y voice, he chased the students and the teachers from the hallway so that Rashida knew she was being watched. “Go on now. Nothing to see here,” he said. She gathered the craziness all around her, tamped it back down into her short, squarish body, and turned to smile at Keith who was just then entering my office.
“Hello Rashida!” he said in a loud, welcoming way.
“I was just saying good-bye to Jackie,” she said turning to me, teeth clenched.
Keith winked, and for the first time since Rashida entered my office, I breathed. “Well, we’ll be sorry to see you go, Rashida,” Keith said although she had not said she
was leaving the school. “But I know you’re busy.”
“That’s true,” she said caught off guard.
“Well you’re welcome anytime,” he said, escorting her from my office.
83

And as she headed down the hall with Keith just slightly behind her, Keith turned and gave me a thumbs up.
Later, he confided that he thought I would take her offer.
“Why?” I asked hurt.
“Why wouldn’t you?” he said. “You know she’ll try to get you now.”
“Would you have taken it?” I asked.
“Nah,” he said; “I like living rent-free in her head.”
After many, many attempts, Rashida understood I would not cave to her spying offers, so
she hatched a different plan. She took her ire out on Fadi by cutting his salary and fixing it so the school system refused to pay for his children’s tuition; it was a benefit he was guaranteed in his contract. Rashida did not care. When she began to hurt Fadi, she hurt me. It was the last straw, so I resigned. It caught Rashida off-guard; she had miscalculated. She thought I would accept her offer, not quit. Over the next six months as I waited for my contract to run out and my freedom to begin, Rashida sent messages through surrogates suggesting I reconsider.
“Will she reinstate Fadi’s pay and benefits?” I asked.
“Insha’allah (God willing),” they replied.
In the end, I chose to leave. I had no reason to trust Rashida. To stay, I would need to
sign another two-year contract, and she would surely have reverted to bullying Fadi to get what she wanted from me. So the following August, I started a new job at Canadian University Dubai.
84

My Father’s Fatherness
Recently, I read a newspaper account of a young Palestinian girl—a Christian—who was stabbed to death by her father for dating a Muslim boy from another neighborhood. For obvious reasons, it struck a chord with me. The more I thought about the account I had read in the Gulf News, the angrier I became. The whole affair was a stupid, senseless loss of life. A beautiful young girl gone; a foolishly-grieving father the cause. Over what? A difference? A foolish misunderstanding of a sacred text? Nothing and no one could condone such an act. Especially by a father. But, I suppose, if he could do such a thing, he should not be given the honor of being called father.
In my estimation, father is a title of distinction and respect; biology alone does not a father make. The title transcends national boundaries and religion, social norms and public scrutiny. It is earned, not assumed. Not all fathers live up to the ideal, of course, and all fathers— even the really good ones—are flawed. But love and respect for children is at the beating heart of what makes a man a father.
My own father was no saint; he made mistakes. A lot of them. He had a wicked, acerbic sense of humor that, without intention, would sometimes bite. He could be grumpy; he could be impolitic. He could be loud and, at times, seem unsympathetic to a cause he did not fully understand. Yet, no one ever doubted his love and respect for children. For his own. For the children of his friends. For his nephews and nieces.
Once a year, my dad loaded up the car for an annual trek to visit his brother’s family. It was a big deal, an interstate odyssey that took us from the mountains of Pennsylvania to the suburbs of Baltimore.The sheer number of children—the six of us together with my uncle’s nine—guaranteed a carnival-like atmosphere where a boatload of cousins could find a lot of fun
85

and not just a little mayhem. A perfect cocktail for the perfect family vacation, in other words. While my dad was strict, his brother tended to domineering; my uncle made his children ration paper products, for example, not because it was environmentally-sound, but because it gave him power. So, my father worked hard to ease the restrictions during our yearly visits, but he could not be sure his summer work would survive his absence. Still, he tried. For his nephews and nieces.
Before arriving for one summer visit, we stopped at a local grocery store to stock up. My mother filled the cart with food; my father filled it with rolls of paper towels. When we arrived at the house, my father pulled several rolls from the bag and made a bee-line to the front door of his brother’s home. Walking through the kitchen, my dad unrolled the paper towels, tearing them off one-by-one, and throwing them up in the air. Like Santa Claus in the summer, my father covered the floor with paper snow.
“Here you go,” he said, giving a sheet to one of the kids.
“One for you, too,” he said to another.
“Hello, Joan,” he kissed my aunt, barely breaking his stride with the paper towels.
By the time, his own brood had made it through the door, my uncles’ family had filtered
into the kitchen, watching him with wide eyes.
“Want a sheet?” he asked one of his nephews.
“Sure would, Uncle Jack,” he played along.
Paper towels covered the kitchen floor, the table, the countertops. When he ran out of
ammo, he recharged from the bags of groceries we brought in.
“Dad, what are you doing?” my oldest sister asked clearly embarrassed by his antics.
86

Our cousins’ laughter soon put us all at ease, however, and we joined in, careening through the falling papers and sliding across the kitchen floor. He was in the process of earning the title father with his brother’s family, something that would come in handy a few sad years later when my uncle left his home and forced his wife and children—nine of them—to fend for themselves. From then on, my father spent the rest of his life trying to make amends to my uncle’s children by acting as a stand-in father.
For my dad, the role of father was expansive, ever-growing to accommodate other children. As a kid, I remember feeling slightly jealous of the children he loved like his own, including my uncle’s children. But my father’s father-ness could not be contained, and, as he grew older, it grew even more automatic.
Four months after moving to the Middle East, I called my father to tell him I had finally found love. He teared up, not at all questioning my choice of a man from another neighborhood and another religion—a Palestinian Muslim. Instead, he looked deep into my mother’s eyes, already fading from the Alzheimer’s that afflicted her and recalled his own announcement from some sixty years earlier. He was, he remembered, the kid with the alcoholic father from the wrong side of the tracks who loved my mom so very much. When my grandmother balked at his proposal, my grandfather stepped in with his blessing. My dad must have recalled the whole memory in the flash of time between my announcement and his response. He must have remembered how it felt to stand in front of a father and wait for the response that would forever change his life. In so doing, he perfectly understood the hope in my declaration.
“Take care of her,” he warned my husband-to-be. “I’ll make you proud,” Fadi responded.
“Just make her happy,” he said, his voice cracking.
87

Just as a father should. A lifetime of words and actions of love and respect for children— his own and others—had long earned him the honor to be called father. A true father.
“Can I call you dad?” my grey-hair, silver-spectacled, forty-something husband-to-be asked. Fadi’s question broke my father’s emotional juggernaut helping him regain his composure and his sense of humor.
My dad looked askew at me through the computer screen that connected us and rolled his eyes. “He couldn’t just stop at yes, could he?” my father asked.
88

Desperately Hot and Stuck on the Gate
July’s weather was miserable, hot, and humid. Sand swirled from the desert ground to sit stranded in the saturated air. Hump-backed camels lumbered languidly through desert dunes searching for water. While homeowners could not be bothered shushing them away, translucent lizards with tiny marbled eyes lined the limestone entryways of homes looking for relief. Temperatures were too hot to record truthfully. So, while the gauge on the dashboard said 50 Celsius, the official government call was 48. Always 48. It never officially got to 50 degrees; such an event would suspend all outdoor work, including the work of men that tended and weeded and watered gardens, worked on highways that ribboned through the desert wild, and kept the outsides of buildings and bridges sparkling white in the simmering sun. As the temperature rose and everything boiled in the summer swelter, steam joined with sand to coat everything and everyone in a sticky, sandy sweat.
Ramadan—the holiest month of the year—had stretched into July’s wretched weather, and I was only days from completing it. All of it. From sun up until sun down, there was no food. There was no water despite the deadly desert heat. By July, I was counting down to the end of the Holy month. Fasting was brutal. I was tired and irritable most of the day, and even as I worked, I thought only of water or anything wet. Anything at all.
“C’mon,” I said as I tried to pull the stubborn shitzu off the marble steps of my home one early morning. If such a thing were possible, Doodles hated the heat even more than me. Maybe because he wore fur. “C’mon Doodles.”
When the big wooden door of the villa clapped shut and Doodles finally moved, I pulled him through the burnt-grass and almost-dead fig trees of the midsummer yard. We walked slowly—Doodles and I—through the wrought iron gate of the high concrete walls that
89

surrounded the villa and out into a little bluff above the main street into the city. Although just after sunrise, I was already hungry and thirsty.
“Jesus, it’s hot,” I said.
As we rounded the block, a slight breeze blew. It might have been the only breeze that July. But at the moment when I realized what would happen and knew I could do nothing to avoid it, I turned to see the seven foot wrought iron gate slam shut and lock.
“Shit!”
Doodles seemed to intuit a problem, turned, and headed back to the house through the hazy heat.
Before the beginning of my first Ramadan, I fasted a few days a week for a month. I was, I suppose, practicing. But Ramadan is an endurance sport, not a sprint. So while it was certainly bad enough to fast for a single day, nothing—and I mean nothing—could prepare me for fasting day after day for thirty days. I tried to game the system by showering several times a day or wading into the pool. Somehow I thought water would enter my body through my pores and alleviate the crushing thirst. It was a really good idea that just didn’t work at all. I considered napping in the afternoon for the few hours between work and sun down, but when I awoke to prepare dinner, the hunger and thirst seemed to begin anew. Throughout the day, my body had somehow numbed itself to the pangs; napping, however, reawakened the gnaw. And made it worse. Nothing seemed to alleviate the misery, and I marveled at how Muslims—who had been doing this torture their whole lives—seemed lit, excited, positively thrilled by the prospect of thirty days of fasting. Ramadan was one long, day-after-day holy day.
90

I stood at the closed gate of my home and power rang the doorbell. In the months since moving into the villa in the northernmost town of Ras al Khaimah, I had never once heard it ring. It never occurred to me to miss it; it never entered my mind that it might not work. Still, I rang. For twenty minutes, in fact. In the summer heat, the water I needed to take me through the day poured from my pores. The white silk blouse I wore glued itself to my skin; my legs stuck together under my skirt.
“I’m going to have to shower again before work,” I said, wondering how much time I had.
Doodles began to bark; he was hot too. The traffic on the road into town picked up behind me, and the sun moved higher in the sky. When the sun was fully up, it was possible to smell the heat.
“FADI!” I screamed at the second floor window, just visible over the tall wall surrounding the property.
Inside, the air conditioner hummed away while Fadi slept. The cool marble of the floors would take that hum and magnify it, muting any sound from outside. While I knew this logically, I continued to scream at the second floor window, and Doodles added the base with his barks.
“FADI! PLEASE FADI!”
Desperately hot, I remembered watching my son crawl up the wrought iron gate to get over the wall. In my misery, it did not occur to me that an extra ten inches and long, long legs might have been the reason Collin could scale the wall so easily. I stood, instead, staring at the gate, plotting my way in. Sandals and a skirt, I would learn, was not been the best apparel for the job, but I made the decision to climb anyway. Desperate times and all that.
91

I tied Doodles’ leash to the gate and kicked off my sandals. I toe’ed my way up, one swirly spindle at a time until I reached the top. Although only seven feet, the effort was monumental. The decoration on the gate was irregular, flowery, and like climbing a rock wall, I had to go where the toe-holds were, stretching my sweating self across the breadth of the wide gate. Moreover, as the wrought-iron decoration was backed by an opaque insert, I had less than an inch of space on which to steady myself before moving to the next level. By the time I reached the top, my hair was matted to the top of my head, make-up ran down my cheeks, and my legs were thick with sand and dirt from the unwashed gate.
A large decorative lantern sat on the wall, and only a few inches separated the gate’s final filigree from the lantern. At the top, I strategized my next step. When I finally threw my right leg over, my skirt bunched up and twisted itself into one of the decorative elements; it all but stopped my forward motion. As I tried to disentangle it, I became wedged between the gate and the lantern, the whole of my body weight held in place by my arms and my left toe. The other side of the gate, I had never noticed before, did not have the decorative wrought-iron element to house my descent.
“FADI!” I screamed over and over again. The dog barked.
Traffic zipped by.
Time ticked on.
I sweated profusely.
Car horns beeped.
My arms began to twitch. My hands bled.
92

I prayed for mercy. “Dear God, help me,” I cried.
Out of the corner of my eye, I saw a man on a bicycle slowly making his way towards me. A Pakistani man. As he closed the distance between us, I recognized him as the janitor at my son’s school.
“Please help me!” I yelled when he was only a block away.
He turned his eyes to the ground in an effort to ignore me.
“Please help me,” I begged. I didn’t know how much longer I could hold on. Although he glanced my way, the man seemed intent to keep moving past me. “Ramadan Kareem (a blessed Ramadan),” I said, and he stopped. Guilt had worked its
magic.
When Doodles barked, he got scared.
“He won’t hurt you,” I said. “He’s just hot.”
The man looked askance at the dog and never fully looked at me.
“What are you doing?” he asked.
While a few really good snarky responses crossed my mind in the seconds before he
asked his question and I answered, I decided I was in no position—NO POSITION—to lead with snark. Instead, helplessness was the tone I chose to project.
“The gate closed. It locked me out,” I explained. “Where’s your mobile?”
“In the house.”
The man shook his head and clicked his tongue. “I can’t hold on,” I said; “I’m going to fall.” “Who’s inside?” he asked.
93

“My husband is sleeping.”
The man began to ring the doorbell. Once. Twice. Three times. By the tenth time, I told him that I had already tried it. My husband could not hear it. “I can’t hold on,” I said and started to cry.
“What do I do?” he asked lost in the moment.
“Get me down,” I instructed.
He shook his head no and placed his right arm diagonally across his chest. This was the
universal sign of a Muslim man who, for religious reasons, would not touch a woman. The man moved towards his bike, taking a wide berth around my twelve-pound dog.
“Wait!” I screamed, “where are you going?”
“I can’t,” he said, nodding to my house but meaning my husband.
“What?” I screamed. “Allah will be angry with you if I fall,” I said.
The man stopped in his tracks, turned, considered his options, and toe-climbed the gate to
me. He untangled my skirt and told me to sit back in his arm. When I was steady on the gate, he removed his arm and toe’ed back down the gate. I followed.
“Thank you. Thank you,” I said breathlessly when I reached the sidewalk. “Will you open the gate?” I asked.
The man made his way back up and over the gate and unlocked it from the inside. When the gate swung open, Doodles stopped barking.
“I’m Jackie,” I said, but he did not respond. “Please,” I said, “I’d like to give you something for helping me.”
The man looked toward the second floor and thought better of staying. He was thinking of the Arabic husband he knew from events at the school.
94

“Please?” I said again; “I’ll only be a minute.”
He shook his head no, picked his bike off the ground, mounted it, and sped off down the street before I could get Doodles unhooked from the gate.
I stood watching him, my legs and arms shaking from the effort I exerted to keep from falling seven feet to the concrete. I was dirty, sweaty, bleeding. Thirsty. Really thirsty. When the man on the bike turned the corner, I moved on shaky legs to my home.
As I opened the heavy wooden door, goose bumps from a blast of cold air joined the bruises and open wounds on my arms and legs. The house was still; Fadi was sleeping. The air conditioner hummed. Everything was in its place, including the phone and keys that sat on the table in the middle of the room. Doodles ran to his water bowl and drank his fill. He was lucky. For me, it was still Ramadan. There would be no water.
“Fadi,” I whispered, still shaking, still bleeding.
When he moved from the bed to standing, my husband finally noticed my state.
“You’re bleeding,” he said.
“You didn’t help me!” I sobbed as I stood motionless in the middle of my bedroom floor. “What happened?”
“I called you a hundred times,” I cried; “and you didn’t help me!”
Fadi moved toward me, “Honey, what happened?” he asked as he wrapped his arms
around me. “Tell me.”
As I recounted the long, sordid story, Fadi punctuated the narrative with a few of his own
phrases. When I told him the gate slammed shut, he asked about my mobile. When I told him about climbing the gate, he met my statement by repeating it in question form: “You climbed the
95

gate?” When I told him about calling to him, fearing I would fall onto the concrete in the courtyard, he explained, “But I couldn’t hear you, lovely.”
“How did you get down?” he asked.
“A man on a bike. From Collin’s school. He stopped to help me.”
“But how did you get down?”
“He climbed up the gate and untangled my skirt. When it was free, I climbed down.” “This man. He touched you?” Fadi asked. From my point of view, my husband had
entirely missed the point of the story.
“Yes. He helped me,” I said defensively.
“But where did he touch you?” he said going all Arab on me.
“Fadi,” I said regaining my American confidence, “I didn’t care if he stuck his tongue
down my throat. He helped me.”
My brashness seemed to snap Fadi out of his culture-induced coma. “Al hamdulillah
(thank God),” he responded although I don’t think he was referring to the tongue part. After showering and dressing again, I drove the desert highway to work. In the air
conditioning of my little red Nissan, I relived the moments hanging onto the top of the gate. While the whole incident scared me, I had to admit that drivers entering Ras al Khaimah probably had a few good stories to tell at work; I could almost hear them: a skirted Western woman with a barking dog below her sat wedged on top of a compound wall yelling at the second floor of what appeared to be her home. Yes, there must have been some good stories that day in Ras al Khaimah.
As the day went on, the shaking that had started from muscle fatigue continued unabated. To the best of my knowledge, the fact that I was seriously dehydrated may have accounted for it.
96

The misery of fasting increased dramatically, and I found myself sitting at my desk unable to work. Or think. I was thirsty. Devastatingly thirsty.
By mid-afternoon, Fadi called to check on me. As the day of fasting wore on, Fadi’s voice became more and more muddled as the lack of food, water, and smokes settled in.
“Hi honey,” he garbled into the phone. “Are you still mad at me?”
“I’m not mad, Fadi,” I grumbled back. “I was upset. And hurt.”
“Do you feel better?”
His question opened the floodgate, “No! I’m not better,” I cried into the phone. “I’m
shaking. Still shaking. Everything hurts.” “Did you take something?”
In a reversal of our roles, I pointed out to Fadi that it was Ramadan; in fact, I explained to him—the only Muslim on the phone call, mind you—that Ramadan meant I couldn’t take something.
“I’m probably dehydrated,” I whined.
“Lovely,” he began slowly, “get some water and eat something.”
“What?”
“Allah doesn’t expect you to hurt yourself. You have a reason to eat and drink today.
Because of the fence.”
“But, I’m almost done,” I said.
“It’s not a competition,” he explained with the voice of a father to a child. “If you’re sick
or hurt, you have to break your fast.” “I can’t,” I cried.
“If you don’t, you are going against Allah. Go. Eat and drink. Call me after.”
97

When I hung up, I walked down the hall to the room in the middle of the school campus, the one with black paper covering the windows and door. When I entered, there were a number of Westerners eating and drinking. They were talking and grading papers, but looked up to see me.
“What’s wrong?” a Brit asked.
“I need to eat.”
“I thought you were fasting?” a woman from South Africa asked.
“I was,” I said. “I am,” I corrected.
“Just give her food,” the first woman said.
“I have a Twix,” a Canadian man offered.
Another teacher got up and walked to the water machine. He grabbed a cup, filled it, and
handed to me. By the time he got to me, I had already downed the candy bar.
“It’s about time you made your way down,” one of the teachers laughed.
“Yeah” another joked; “I can’t believe you’ve been fasting. It’s too much.”
I sat for a few minutes and chatted. When I concealed all the evidence of my breach of
Ramadan, I cracked the door enough to look up and down the hall. When I didn’t see anyone, I quickly left the room and walked back to my office. I sat down behind my desk, and for the first time that day—or maybe in 27 days—I was smiling. I dialed Fadi.
“I feel bad,” I said, but I really did not. “You shouldn’t. Did you eat?”
“Only a candy bar and water.”
“Eat a lunch,” Fadi said.
“I’m okay,” I replied.
98

“Jack, you can eat and drink all you want now,” he said. “Go ahead. Eat.”
But I was too stubborn. I had regained my competitive spirit, and I was ready to commit to finishing Ramadan.
A few days after the gate incident, Fadi and I arrived at the Dubai airport on the last day of Ramadan. When we boarded the plane to the US and the doors were closed, Ramadan was officially over. I had made it—well, except for a Twix candy bar and a cup of water. While I loved the idea of being forced to experienced what most of the world experiences on a daily basis, I was astounded by the sheer brutality of thirty days of fasting. Especially in the desert. But I was heading home to the US, and my new husband was going with me. All was right with the world.
“I’m proud of you,” Fadi leaned in to tell me.
“It was hard. Maybe the hardest thing I’ve ever done.”
“But you did it. And next year will be easier.”
My smile turned to tears as I contemplated fasting again. It was only eleven months
away.
99

Just Like in the Movies
A woman’s screams. A crowded boat. Sightseers from Liberty Island clad in the green foam crowns of Lady Liberty. Their chorus of screams joined with the woman’s; they feared for their lives, but did not know why. I was Patient Zero, the screaming woman. Moments earlier, the metal plank that connected the ferry to the dock, shot up into the air as the boat lurched forward. When it slammed back down—thump!—it landed on my foot, not the dock. The bridge of my right foot held the weight of the ferry and the almost one thousand passengers. The pain was too great to define as the bones in my foot made way for the gold metal embellishment of the sandal. A wholly unconscious peal of the primal spread outward from somewhere within me, permeating the collective consciousness of the crowd. In one great wave of panic, passengers began to elbow their way towards the exit.
“Mom, what’s wrong?” Collin asked, more embarrassed than worried.
By the time the crowd on the ferry had pegged the Arab face next to me as the perpetuator of some crime, whatever crime, Fadi had seen my once-white foot, now full black, trapped under the plank. In his panic, his English deserted him, and Arabic spewed from his mouth. His language only verified the crowd’s assumptions, and their growing apprehension threatened my husband’s safety.
“What’s going on?” people in the crowd asked.
“A terrorist,” I heard from somewhere to the right.
“ISIS,” someone cried out behind me.
While I knew my husband was in danger, I could not focus my energy to respond. “What’s wrong?” Collin kept asking. “Mom, what’s wrong?”
Then he saw.
100

“Her foot!” he screamed. “It’s stuck!” he said, drawing the crowd’s attention to the source.
“Her foot’s trapped,” the front of the crowd telephoned to the back. “She wasn’t stabbed,” someone said, disappointed.
A few months earlier, Fadi had appeared at an appointment at the American Consulate in Dubai and asked for permission to travel home with me for the summer. To mark proof of his existence, my husband carried with him a hand-written travel card, not a passport. Without a passport, his world was restricted to a small area of the Middle East; his life choices were similarly restricted by the fate he was born into as a refugee. In Lebanon, he wasn’t allowed to study to become a doctor or a lawyer or an engineer; Lebanese officials feared he might take jobs from their citizens. But teaching? Okay. As long as he taught other refugees.
LOOK, Fadi’s text read with a picture of a US visitor’s visa. Another text followed: I can’t believe I’m going to America. I wasn’t surprised. I was an American; he was my husband. It was the obvious, logical outcome of his visit to the consulate. At least, to me. But, Fadi was a Palestinian refugee and, in all his years of requesting travel visas, he had only been granted permission to travel to the UAE, China, and Saudi. A man without a country is a risk to the visa grantors; he might not return to the unknown, the unknowable. To Fadi, being denied was the more obvious, logical outcome.
When we finally landed in New York, he was bright with the possibilities of the US. Until we reached immigration. As an officer thumbed through his travel document, a question registered in his eyes: What is this? His focus turned to me. Who is she to him? Did she marry him, so he could get a passport? Did he pay her? He looked back to my husband’s travel
101

document and uncaged the walkie-talkie from its leather sheath at his side. Extra guards were called in. In no time, security surrounded us, my husband and me. “I am an American; Fadi is my husband,” I explained over and over again. But Fadi’s optimism faded. We’re going back, he thought. Or, at least, I am.
People in line behind us clicked their tongues and rolled their eyes. They whispered, “ISIS,” and nodded at my husband. For a few minutes, we stood at the threshold between nowhere and home, and for the first time, I got a glimpse of what Fadi’s life must have been like. “He’s my husband,” I said firmly, “and he’s a refugee,” I said loud enough for the people behind us to hear. A few sharp questions later, Fadi’s non-passport was approved, and we moved through JFK out into the taxi-honking, people-whistling, finger-throwing freedom of the US. I was home.
“It’s not like in the movies,” I said for at least the ten millionth time while we waited for a ride into the city. As yellow taxis lined up on the curb, airport employees blew whistles. “Hey buddy, you’re up,” they screamed between blasts. Cabbies opened and slammed trunks, and riders barked out destinations. In the mayhem, I ticked off the agenda for the next few days.
“We’ll pick Collin up at the train station tomorrow, check out the Statue of Liberty. . . .” “Statue of Liberty?”
“. . . and a play on Broadway. Maybe two.”
We were tired; Fadi was overwhelmed. It was late—very late. Traffic was light, and the
city was sleepier than I had ever seen it. As we neared Manhattan, I pointed out the iconic monuments lit against the dark New York sky at the time when night had all but passed, but morning had not yet begun.
102

Once downtown, we checked into the hotel and opened the door—our door—to an Asian man wrapped in a towel from the waist down.
“WHAT THE FUCK?”
“Oh my God,” I said; “I’m sorry.”
Fadi opened the door wider, however, and the light from the hall triangulated in the space
between us and the almost-naked man. Fadi held up the room key.
“You’re in our room,” Fadi said.
“Fadi,” I said, reaching for his arm; “there must be a mistake. C’mon.”
Fadi cleared his throat and called for the concierge.
“C’mon, man. Close the fucking door.”
“It’s our room,” Fadi said adamantly, holding up the key with the room number on it. The concierge finally reached us, made a quick assessment, and apologized. “A mistake,”
he said, shaking his head. “Must be some mistake.”
Fadi and I were issued new keys to a new room, one without an almost naked man, one
several floors away and on the opposite side of the hotel. We dropped our bags inside the room and left the hotel on a hunt for food.
“Fadi,” I began cautiously, “this is New York. A little less Arab,” I told him. “A little more careful. Don’t engage so much with people.”
“A salaam aluaikan,” Fadi greeted the three owners of a little grocery store.
We were at the start of the Trump era, Muslim ban and all, so I looked to the owners to explain, “We’re from Dubai. Left yesterday morning, you know, and we’ve been traveling ever since.” Instead of acknowledging me, the men reached their hands out to Fadi.
103

“Wa aluaikan salaam,” they said, the Arab response to Fadi’s “peace be with you” greeting.
Fadi turned and smiled at me, “A little less Arab, huh?”
This is my country, I thought in an almost-insulted, but really kind of amused way as I listened to the conversation in Arabic. After several minutes, we bought a few items, said our good-byes in Arabic—maa salaama—and headed back to the hotel—to our room. As we lay in bed, Fadi turned to me, “I like New York.”
A group of sailors rocked on the dock of Liberty Ferry until the plank moved off my foot. “Stay still,” they yelled to the passengers behind me. The passengers didn’t listen and continued to elbow their way forward. When my foot was free, the sailors carried me across the plank to Battery Park. Police on horseback were already waiting. One of the cops removed my sandal to reveal a foot as black as anthracite coal. Swollen to two times its normal size, a purple mark was spreading, radiating from the middle and out. The imprint of the metal inlay of my sandal was etched deep into my foot.
“Ice. My wife,” Fadi pointed to me. “Ice,” he sputtered, and a vendor in Battery Park reacted, filling a bag full for my husband.
“Ten thousand pounds,” the New York City policeman was saying, shaking his head in disbelief. “Ten thousand pounds,” he pointed to the ferry and then back at my foot; “landed on your foot.”
“Oh,” I responded in too much pain to consider what he was saying.
“Lucky she didn’t try to pull it out,” he said to Fadi who was only then placing the ice on my foot.
104

“No,” I screamed and pushed the ice off.
“Mom,” Collin winced.
“If she had pulled it, she’d a ripped the skin off,” the officer continued.
“You need to keep it on,” Fadi said, redistributing the ice gently over my foot.
“Do it, mom. He’s right.”
“The bones might a come too,” the policeman droned on.
Fadi nodded absently.
“It hurts,” I cried.
“It would a hurt a whole lot more if the bones were out,” the policeman joked.
“Just give it a little time,” Fadi said. “It will help.”
“You know, a few years ago . . .,” the officer began a story in which a woman had tried to
pull her foot out from under the plank of the ferry. He finally had Fadi’s attention. “Mom?” Collin asked; “I should go get the tickets for the play.”
Both Fadi and the officer stopped talking to look at Collin.
“We have to get them before five,” he continued.
“Want to take a taxi?” I asked him.
“Stay with your mom,” Fadi instructed.
“No, it’s okay,” I said. “Let him go.”
“Already called an ambulance. You’ll need to go,” the officer said, pointing at my foot. “Go with him,” I told Fadi, motioning to Collin.
“I won’t leave you.”
“Well, there’s only room for one more anyway,” the officer said.
105

As Collin prepared to leave, the medics brought the gurney through the park to the dock where I waited. They lifted me and strapped me in. Then, they motioned for Fadi to follow.
“It’s probably broken. Pretty friggin’ bad, I guess,” the officer assessed.
“Maybe it’s okay,” Fadi said. “Insha’allah,” he whispered a prayer.
Once I was lifted into the ambulance, we set off, careening through the late afternoon
New York City streets. Despite the pain, I started to laugh. “What?”
“It’s like I set the whole thing up.”
“What?”
“Like the movies, isn’t it?” I asked.
And when we ended our ride at Presbyterian Hospital, Fadi agreed. “Just like the
movies,” he said as the gurney crashed through the doors towards emergency.
On our first morning in New York City, Fadi and I arrived at its famous hub: Times Square. Holding my purse securely against my body, we pushed our way through the throngs of visitors snapping selfies. Fadi stared at and, then, bumped into a steady stream of superhero impersonators. The Mickey and Minnie Mouse lookalikes, the Super Mario impressionists, and the Statue of Liberty aspirants zeroed in on the gape-jawed, foreign-looking Fadi, hoping to make a buck from the iPhone-wielding tourist. They did. Meanwhile, I was busy pulling him through the street ministrations of the Bible thumpers and the head-down-get-out-of-my-way-on- a-mission-to-get-somewhere New Yorkers, but missed the horse-mounted police in the square.
“Hey, buddy,” one yelled at Fadi. “Keep your head in the game.” “There’s the naked cowboy,” I gestured to Fadi without stopping.
106

“Oh my God,” Fadi gasped. While he had seen him in a movie or two, he was shocked to see he was a real fixture in Times Square.
“He’s wearing underwear,” I explained. “Behind the guitar,” I thumbed back at him.
“Al Hamdulillah (Thank God),” Fadi responded, mostly in sarcasm, watching my disinterestedness in the face of something that should have shocked me.
As we threaded our way past iconic stores—Disney and Forever 21—and the Orwellian- like screen that snapped pictures of people in the square in front of it, Fadi stopped dead.
“What?” I asked.
“She’s naked,” he said sheepishly.
“Nahh, it’s against the law. No one’s naked,” I said, pulling him along.
But he stood rigid, completely flummoxed, so I followed his eyes to the center of the
street where a woman’s bare breasts were being painted in the colors of the American flag. “God bless America,” I blurted out irreverently.
“Not like the movies?” he asked. “It’s worse,” he said.
Because I did not know how to explain it and because I was slightly ashamed, I pulled at
him to move along.
“We need to get Collin,” I said. “This way.”
An hour and a half after arriving at the hospital, I was released. Everything was fine. Not a single broken bone. Not a hairline fracture. No long-term issues. Nothing.
“Really, it’s astounding,” the young intern said. “The color’s better.” The black was already retreating into purple, and the purple was disappearing into patches of white. While the indent of the metal from my sandal would fade over time, it would never completely disappear.
107

“There’s still time for the second act,” I announced. “Wanna catch a cab downtown?” Despite their world-famous bluster, New Yorkers are pretty tolerant, and they get to
acceptance by questioning. The city is a microcosm of the full US, a tiny snapshot of the way in which most Americans live and interact with the other. So it was no surprise when the cabbie, a resident of Queens, picked us up and immediately began asking questions.
“Where to?”
“Broadway. And we’re late.”
“Really late,” the cabbie said taking note of the time on his watch.
“How long, do you think?”
“I’ll get you there before intermission,” he said, stepping on the gas.
“Where’s he from?” he asked, looking into the rearview mirror and nodding at Fadi. “We live in Dubai,” Fadi answered.
“No shit,” the cabbie exclaimed. “Dubai, huh?” he said, shaking his head. “No shit. I
seen it on TV. New Year’s, you know?”
“I’m going to pray,” Fadi whispered to me.
“OK.”
As Fadi began his prayers, I watched the cabbie watch Fadi from the rearview mirror.
When Fadi bowed in prayer, his hands framing his face, the cabbie sat up, straining his eyes to understand what was happening in the backseat of his taxi.
“Hey,” he looked at me in the mirror; “what’s he doing?” “He’s praying,” I said, leaning forward.
“No shit?”
“No shit,” I responded, looking to Fadi.
108

The cabbie continued to watch as I anticipated his next question.
“He’s Muslim,” I said and explained what had happened at the ferry that had kept him from praying.
“And your foot’s okay?” the cabbie asked, genuinely concerned. “Yeah. Perfect. Can you believe it?”
“And he’s praying?”
“Yeah. He’s praying.”
“Get the fuck out,” he responded gleefully.
Fadi looked up, caught the cabbie’s eye in the mirror, and smiled.
“He’s fuckin praying in my fucking cab.”
“Finished,” Fadi said.
“I hope you said a fucking prayer for me,” the cabbie said good-naturedly.
“Al hamdulillah,” Fadi responded.
A minute or two later, the cabbie pulled up onto the sidewalk—literally up onto the
sidewalk, not far from a group of al fresco diners. The diners seemed disinterested, however. “Better make a run for it,” he said, looking at his watch and giving directions.
Foam Statue of Liberty hats in hand, my right foot encased in gauze and an ace bandage,
Fadi and I made it to the front door of the theatre just as intermission was ending. We nestled in next to Collin as the curtain lifted to Eponine from “Les Miserables.”
“How do you feel, mom?”
“A little sore. Fadi stayed the whole time, even at x-ray.”
“On my own, / Pretending he’s beside me,” Eponine began to sing on stage. “He was really scared,” Collin added.
109

“More scared than me.” “Shh,” Fadi whispered. Just like in the movies.
110

Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh
Across from the Sea of Oman, wonderfully woven Persian and Turkish and Omani rugs exploded in intricate patterns of deep reds and purples, emeralds and ivories. They were hung on ancient walls of plastered camel hair next to kabob shops where hunks of skewered lamb sat prominently displayed; brawny men with double-handled silver knives sliced and served it in sandwiches of steaming flat bread. The savory smell of roasting meat collided with exotic- smelling fragrances; together, they mingled and meandered through the brick-paved alleyways of the old Arabic bazaar. The souq, as the Arabs called it. Sitting shoulder-to-shoulder in tight, turning passages, simple old-world style storefronts showcased silvery trinkets and intricately- carved raw-stoned jewels sitting beneath vibrantly colored lanterns that hung from ceilings and next to cutlery carved from shells and antique camel costumery. Clouds of smoke billowed out of glittering gold incense burners filled with the contents of bags of resin and small glass jars of sweet-smelling powders; sticks of charcoal stood lined up like soldiers against windows, and men in colorful pillbox hats spilled into the street to push their wares.
“Frankincense, Madame?” a shop owner asked pushing himself into my space. “Smell,” he demanded and placed an opened tin under my nose.
In Oman, where the stuff is bled from spindly looking trees, frankincense is known by its Arabic name—al luban—which has the fitting translation of that which comes from milking. The Western name is derived from the Frankish crusaders who brought it back to Europe and, then, introduced it into the Catholic mass. The smoke from burning frankincense was said to be symbolic of the spiritual nature of God. More importantly for the Catholic mass, three wise men from the East chose frankincense as the middle of their three famous gifts—gold, frankincense, and myrrh—which they placed at the feet of the baby Jesus.
111

Growing up Catholic, I knew frankincense as an absurdly sweet-smelling smoke. It was part of some Sunday masses. The priest in his best vestments walked up and down the aisles of the church, swinging a chasuble full of the oddly fragrant stuff into our freshly washed faces. We hated it. As we got older and wiser, we listened for the clink of chain that warned us of its imminent arrival. Much to the chagrin of our parents in the same pews, we twisted and contorted our faces away from the cleric, the palms of our hands plastered over our noses shielding us from its perfume. Oh! I knew frankincense alright. It figured prominently in every Christmas story and in every Christmas pageant; it had a part in Christmas songs and Christmas pictures and Christmas movies.
“Frankincense, Madame?” the shopkeeper offered again reading my hesitation.
I looked to Collin to see if the moment had registered any significance with him; it had not, but his blasé attitude did not diminish my enthusiasm. For most of my life, I had learned the stories formed in the religious crucible of the Middle East. There was Moses and the parting of the Red Sea, and there was Jesus with a head full of thorns who shouldered his cross through the streets of Jerusalem. Herod breathed and strode and murdered baby boys in ancient Palestine, John the Baptist inducted the converts at the Jordan River, and three magi carried frankincense to the baby boy in Bethlehem. Yet, all these stories had an unreal, almost fairytale quality to them. The physical worlds of the Bible stories had no connection to my own, and since the physical parts of the stories seemed somehow secondary to the spiritual insights, I simply accepted them as something I was expected to accept. Standing in the ancient alleyways of the Omani souq, however, had brought the stories of my youth to life, and I could almost feel the footsteps of the three magi in the very passages where I now bargained for frankincense. Yes! Frankincense!
“Frankincense, you said?” I asked the shopkeeper.
112

“Frankincense, Madame,” he said shaking the resin he held under my nose.
Since moving to the Middle East a bit more than a year earlier, I had come face-to-face with the physical aspects of the spiritual stories of my childhood. Just as I had in the little alleyway in the middle of the Muscat-based souq. The props and settings and key material markers had become real, tangible, less exotic, and almost normal. In Oman, frankincense became a fact based in the physical; I could touch it, taste it, and if the shopkeeper were good at his trade, I would buy it and take it home. As I stood looking at the opened tin, I considered the possibility that one or all of the wise men may have stood on the ground where I now stood. Perhaps one had purchased his gift for the baby Jesus in the exact place and from a distant ancestor of the shopkeeper who continued to push the tree resin into my face.
“What’s wrong?” Collin asked.
“I just had an epiphany,” I answered and laughed at my private, pathetic Catholic joke. In Catholicism, Epiphany is the name of the feast day that commemorates the three magi,
the day that Catholics celebrate the humility of the wise men from the East who, in the presence of the newborn Jesus, laid down their gifts.
“How much?” I asked the shopkeeper snapping out of my reverie and back into the present.
“Eight riyahl,” he answered.
“Haram (sinful),” I chided him; “I’ll give you four.”
“Seven,” he countered trying to strike a bargain.
Haggling in Arabic countries is a contest of Olympic-like proportions; nothing less than
one’s wit and cunning were on the field. Yet when I first came to the UAE, I accepted whatever price was asked because I did not understand the cultural implications of not bartering; however,
113

I noticed almost from the beginning of my residency that shop owners seemed to look at me with contempt at the end of each transaction. I attributed it to being a Western woman; I was wrong. Since they expected a customer to bargain with them, they purposely padded the price of any single item. The initial price, then, might be double or triple its value; the goal was to increase the price enough to accommodate the sport of bargaining. Not trying to strike a deal, however, not only preempted some much-anticipated competition but it also put the shop owner at the very brink of committing a sin. In Islam, shopkeepers take what is theirs. And nothing more. So when I first came to the Middle East and did not engage in negotiations, they were forced to throw in something for free to alleviate the guilt they felt—and also the potential sin—of charging too much.
“Seven riyahl,” the shopkeeper said again.
“But it’s EID,” I purred.
Game point, I thought. My nod to the religious holiday registered. I could see it in the
shopkeeper’s smile. I had earned the position of power in the bargaining process with this strategy, and he nodded his approval of a hand well-played.
“Six. This is my last offer,” he smiled. “For EID.”
“Five, and I’ll take it.”
“Six, and I’ll give you a tin of myrrh and a charcoal stick.”
Myrrh? my mind reeled. Did he say myrrh? This was the third gift of the wise men. The
shopkeeper guessed well that his mention of myrrh would throw me off my game, soften me up, bring me from my high of using EID as a bargaining chip. And he was right. I was so eager to own two of the three gifts of the magi that I almost leapt at his offer. Before I did, however, I calmed myself, steadied my breathing, walked away from him to the window of his shop, picked
114

up a camel keychain, and pretended to examine it with interest. I was not the least bit interested in the keychain, and the shopkeeper knew it.
“Myrrh, Madame,” he said practically singing the name of the second gift.
I raised my eyebrows at him and pretended to be indifferent. But when he raised the ante with myrrh, he read my readiness to buy. He would not budge; he had me, and he knew it. So did I. The quibbling was over.
“Khalas (finished),” I said and accepted defeat.
The shopkeeper smiled wide, walked to his storefront, and began to wrap my purchases. “More charcoal, Madame?” he asked with a flourish of his hand towards the display. “La. Mafi (no more),” I replied.
“All I need is gold,” I whispered to Collin.
“What?” he asked.
“Gold,” I repeated. “You know, gold,” I emphasized and then added, “frankincense, and
myrrh.”
The importance of the gifts had still not resonated with him. Our tenure as good Catholics
ended, for the most part, when Collin was in fourth grade, so he had not had the time to learn every aspect of every Catholic belief. While the story of the three wise men came naturally to me, it was lost in translation for the not-too-Catholic Collin. He did not think like a Catholic, and so he was unimpressed by what I had discovered there in the souq. But Collin liked the smell of frankincense and had already secretly hoped I would buy some, maybe even a lot. We both wanted it, but each of us wanted it for completely different reasons.
“Madame,” the shopkeeper said as he handed the packages to me.
“Shukran (thank you),” I said and then added, “EID Mubarak (a blessed holiday).”
115

As I walked away with bags of frankincense and jars of myrrh, a brilliant idea struck me. Or, at least, I thought it was brilliant. If my epiphany about the physical trappings of the magi was so strong and animated, I began to imagine what my still-Catholic family might think of such gifts. In only a few moments, I was able to daydream my triumphant Christmas return from the Middle East to Northeastern Pennsylvania. Like the magi of the stories, I would carry the gifts of the wise men for my own family. The magi traveled far; I would travel far. They came from the East; I would come from the East. They came bearing gifts; I would come bearing gifts. They brought gold, frankincense, and myrrh. And so would I. It would be the Christmas gift coup of the century.
What about the gold? I thought in a panic. I need gold.
While I loved my family, I had neither the money nor the desire to find gold pieces for them. Frankincense, yeah. Myrrh, yeah. They were reasonably cheap. But gold? No way. And at the lowest point of the day, a moment of pure deflation, I stood lost in thought looking dejectedly at another incense store. Where can I get the gold? I asked myself. It was then when the smoke of the frankincense caught my eye. I followed it down to its source: the gold incense burner. And elation returned.
Gold incense burners, I thought. “Let’s get them,” I pointed to the burner while I pulled Collin towards another little store.
“Mom, Aunt Susan won’t let you burn it,” he said busting the mood with truth. “She’ll say she’s allergic to perfume or something like that.”
I knew he was right, but I was not ready to give up on the Christmas gift coup I had been contemplating.
“I’ll buy them anyway,” I said still hopeful. “She won’t have to burn it.”
116

“They’re too big,” Collin added. “You have to get them home,” he said in his utterly too practical way.
I knew he was right, so I walked away from the room-sized store, carrying my own store of frankincense and myrrh, but not the much-needed gold. I rambled from storefront to storefront trying to quell the disappointment by finding other gifts for my family. Curved and jewel- encrusted silver daggers for my brothers. Silver harem jewelry for my sisters. After a few hours, bags in hand, I was beginning to feel better. While I would not return home with the gold, frankincense, and myrrh of my momentary daydream, the gifts were unique and, more importantly, straight from the land of the wise men. And then just when I had relinquished my need for the wise men’s gifts and in a moment of pure providence, I saw them. The culmination of my desire in a small, compact, non-smoking form. Someone had clearly seen the implications of the story on sales, just as I had, and had the foresight to design the perfect Christmas gift: gold, frankincense, and myrrh soap. Yes, soap!
Each palm-sized bar contained gold-glittered frankincense and myrrh in a sweet-smelling package that was brilliantly finished off with matching gold ribbons. I bought eleven bars. I would have bought more if they had more. Family, friends, strangers on the street would be given the best Christmas gift ever, at least in my mind.
“I don’t get it, mom,” Collin said as I moved to the cashier loaded with soaps.
I bought the bars of soap in spite of him. Damn his practicality, I thought. When the little soaps were packaged, I handed the bags to my son.
“They’re heavy,” he whined.
“Stop complaining,” I joked. “Don’t you remember the story of the three wise men?” I asked in a moment of bliss after my purchase.
117

“Kinda’,” he said.
At his response, I contemplated telling him the story with the zeal of a born-again Catholic. We were standing in the place—maybe the exact place—where one of the main characters had come from. A story of more than two thousand years ago was alive in the city where we now vacationed. It was an exhilarating thought. But as I looked at his face full of complaint, I knew my zeal would be wasted.
“Jesus, Collin,” I said instead of telling the story; “shut up and carry the bag.”
He did, and we walked on to the next store in the Omani souq where one of the wise men had once walked.
118

Hot has a Smell in the Desert
I run a school in the desert. The United Arab Emirates hired me, an English-speaking pseudo Catholic from a foreign country and put me in charge of their children. The honor has not been lost on me. An American woman, my school holds almost 600 Arab boys. All in high school. All Emirati. All Muslim. On so many levels, this is an odd educational experiment. But we all play our parts. We have learned respect for each other, and really that’s all that matters. This mutual respect of culture, custom, religion, belief, and language makes my everyday joyous, filled with learning, lucky even.
Excitement runs through the school building today; there's a notable change in the weather. On most days, the temperature is the only part of the daily forecast that changes, and then, not by much. A few degrees here; a few degrees there. When the air temperature reaches 115 degrees (and it does for a good part of the year), nobody pays attention to these small temperature changes. What difference does a few degrees make when it's already so unbearable. As winter approaches, however, the few degrees of change move slowly down the temperature gauge until it settles at a steady, beautiful air temperature of 75 degrees Fahrenheit. After suffering through the summer heat, the change is not only welcomed, but celebrated. In the reprieve from the hell-like temperatures of the summer months, ACs are finally switched off and life moves outside. Sheeshas pop up on the balconies, and the fruity, fragrant smoke competes with the acrid smells of cars on the city streets. Patrons spill out of their local coffee shops to play backgammon and chess throughout the night. Runners appear on the hazy gulf, and campfires spring up all along the road that cuts its swath through the loneliness of the desert. But in general, even with a change in temperature, the weather report remains pretty much the same from day-to-day in the UAE: sunny, clear, blue skies, 0 percent chance of rain.
119

Today, however, rain is predicted, and it has been predicted for much of the last week. The build-up—especially in the school building—has been enormous. Rain is coming. Rain is coming, we all feel, and the electricity of it zips from person to person. I realize, as I watch the boys preparing for what is coming, that I have seen more rain in one week than most of them have seen in their whole lives. In fact, whole classes of students can combine their collective experiences with rain, and I would still have seen more in only one week. At home, rain was a nuisance. But scarcity makes a thing more precious, and rain in the desert is more rare than the most precious gemstone in America.
There are several reasons why rain brings such excitement. The first is obvious. It hardly rains in the desert. Almost never, in fact. It happens so infrequently that it is considered spiritual, a gift from God. When it comes, the gift from God is recognized and acknowledged by the desert people. Al Hamdulillah, the Arabs respond to rain. Thank God in Arabic. Al Hamdulillah, the boys in my school repeat to each other to acknowledge its coming. Al Hamdulillah, I learned to say automatically at first. Al Hamdulillah, I now say and mean.
Rain also has the ability to defeat the assault of the desert sands . . . if only for a little while. There is so much sand. Too much sand. An infinity of sand: red and white and the beach- colored kind. There are the fine sands of Abu Dhabi and the coarse sands of Ras al Khaimah. On the golf courses, there is imported sand from the US. (A little like selling the Brooklyn Bridge, wouldn't you say?). There is sand that turns a twinkling golden color when the sun hits it, and there is the metallic coppery sand of the sunset. There is wet sand and dry sand, and the kind of sand that is used to build the engineering miracles of man-made islands. There is so much sand that after only a little while in country, you forget to notice the sand that swirls around, set permanently in the air, covering and coating everything it meets. No one and nothing is exempt
120

from its assault. Even the mountains make only sporadic stands against its intrusion. For most of the year, the majestic Hajjar Mountains are hidden by the hazy, swirling, thickness lifted up from the desert floor. Like the hijab that covers the beauty of the women in this country, sand hides the face of the mountain range. So when the rain comes on those one or two days each year and the Hajjar Mountains reappear from behind its sandy veil, it is like the world is freshened and renewed and opened up to hope again.
There is a weird calmness as the school community stands at morning assembly, listening to the recording of the symphony playing the UAE National Anthem. Some of the words I know; after 20 months of hearing the same song every day, it's hard not to pick up a few of them. I tap my foot to the rhythm and mouth the song along with the boys: biladi, biladi, biladi. I don't know what biladi means, but I know where it comes in the national anthem, and for now, that's enough. It helps me feel part, less isolated. As I sing, I notice the grey around me. Clouds darken the sky; they're unusual in a place where sunny, blue skies are the norm. The air is heavy, almost electric, and a wind is blowing, nearly cool, but not quite. We're still in the desert after all.
The students feel the coming rain, too, and they are ready for it. If and when it comes, everything will stop. EVERYTHING. WILL. STOP. Students, without asking for permission, will get up from their chairs and move to the windows to see the falling drops. If they're lucky enough to see a downpour, they will leave their classes for the courtyard. There won't be any trouble from the teachers. No permission is asked; no permission is withheld. Teachers, too, want to see rain. Outside the walls of the school building, cars will pull off onto the side of the road. Road crews will stop working. Truckers will bring their rigs to a dead stop on the highway. Government officials will walk out of high-level meetings. iPads flash pictures. Hundreds of
121

videos catalog the event. Rain is so very unusual that all other matters—even the most important ones—stop in tribute to it.
In only a few moments at morning assembly, the clouds above the school community have become heavier, darker. One boy reads from the Quran, lifting his eyes from the page to look towards the sky. There's a certain symbolic feel to the gesture, of course, but we all know he's looking for rain. Although he will equate the coming of the rain with Allah’s goodness, for sure. The eyes of the other students follow his lead, looking heavenward. Somehow it seems appropriate. No one corrects them. Their looks are greeted by a few drops of rain, not too many, not really rain yet, but still something.
After a few minutes, the boys begin to move in lines into the school building. And the rain starts. Not drops, but real rain falls. Tentatively. Hardly. As the students feel the raindrops, they stop. Every line. Every student. Every teacher. The administrators. We all stop. We all wait. There is an eerie silence as the students look first to each other and then towards their teachers for clarification. But all too quickly, the rain stops. The forecasts appear to have been right, but the sensation did not last long enough to satisfy. The disappointment outside the school building is obvious. Palms that had been raised to Heaven drop, and spirits temporarily deflate. Without any announcement to do so, the lines begin to move again. The teachers and the students dissolve into their classrooms.
"Yalaa, shabop (hurry, young ones)," security calls to the students, pointing them towards the doors of the school. Heads drop in response. Gates quicken. And then the wind blows a bit harder; there's more of a hint of coolness in it. The students' anticipation grows in response, goose bumps raise up on their skin, their excited chatter increases. I already know it's going to be
122

one of those days when even the simplest lesson will be a struggle; bodies will be inside, but minds and hearts will be out.
I, too, move inside, feeling somehow let down by the scarcity of the promised rain. Sitting at my desk, I can look straight through the glass walls of my office through the hallway windows to the courtyard. The red, white, and green of the UAE flags flutter and the sand in the courtyard begins to swirl in the gathering wind. A flash of lightning. A rumble.
And then the skies let loose.
It's raining. Really raining. Puddles are forming, and the drops dance in the standing water. When I was a kid, we called the pings of drops in puddles, rain ballerinas. I am comforted by something that had always seemed so ordinary. Rain ballerinas, I feel throughout my whole being. I feel both connected to home and homesick . . . all at the same time. This world that is always so different from the world I grew up in suddenly shares this one, singular phenomenon with home. And I belong. Like a good pseudo-Emirati, I open the mobile phone and take a video. How did something so commonplace, I wonder, become something so extraordinary? I capture the sound of the raindrops for later, for when I need to be reconnected to my familiar.
The faces of the boys are pressed against the windows of the school. Teachers' too. I see a local man, around my age, standing outside, arms stretched wide, palms turned upward. Al Hamdulillah, I see him mouth as I watch him through the window. His white kandura—the coat- like robe of the gulf Arabs—is being splattered by the falling rain. At first there is just a series of spots, an abstract painting of white on white, but within a few moments, the spots connect, and he is wet. Really wet. Kandura's are white, you know, so Mr. Abdallah is not hiding a thing as he stands in the rain, eyes closed, arms outstretched, smile wide on his face, turning round and
123

round. Al Hamdulillah, he sings over and over again to the sky. He doesn't seem to care about his sudden lack of modesty. Mr. Abdallah meets the exceptional with the exceptional.
"Just one or two minutes," Mr. Abdallah tells me after coming in from the rain, "will make you clean, right to your heart. Go. Walk," he pushes me to the door . . . without touching me, of course. Muslim men do not touch women, and he affords me the same respect even though I’m not Muslim. He positions his body in a way that gives me almost no choice but to follow his words, and I move outside.
I feel the rain for the first time in almost two years. Al Hamdulillah, I say, as I lift my face to the drops. Al Hamdulillah, Mr. Abdallah responds to me at the door to the school. Al Hamdulillah, I say again, noticing, maybe for the first time in my life, how good rain feels on the skin. I close my eyes and breathe it all in. Al Hamdulillah. And all I know for sure is that as the rain pours down on the desert streets and the steam rises from those same streets in response, I swear I can smell the heat being washed away. Hot has a smell in the desert.
124

Hijabs and Hamam
In the center of Ras al Khaimah where poor fishermen still used old wooden boats with sails and nets to bring in the day’s catch, a series of storefronts, not much more than glass- fronted shacks, sat lined-up on side streets and roads that turned in on themselves or ended abruptly at the waterfront. In the middle of the merging streets was the fish market, a large white building with a robust and aromatically-inclined daily business. From its premier position, bargain hunters had easy access to the Pakistani souq. While Dubai had souqs for gold and woven woolen rugs, for colorful Palestinian ceramicware, ground pillows and tents, and colored glass in silver hanging lanterns, Ras al Khaimah’s souq had far better bargains. In the dusty and dirty corners of the downtown, the Pakistani souq did a healthy trade in cut-rate perfumes and cashmere scarves. The streets were lined with fine tailors who sewed saris for Indians and abayas for Emiratis. There were shops for the white robe-like kanduras and matching head scarves in a variety of colors, and there were displays for the signature black braided cords to help keep the head scarves in place. Bargaining was a must, and patrons engaged with gusto.
“One hundred fifty. It’s Calvin Klein,” the Pakistani merchant barked at Fadi.
“Haram (sinful)!” Fadi yelled in reply. “No more than fifty.
“Fifty?” the shop owner responded. “This is an insult!”
Our presence had already created a stir. A tall Arab man with, as they said in the Middle
East, a white Western woman was not something they saw every day, so the workers and other customers gathered around the counter as the bargaining began. At first, they were curious to understand our relationship. When they realized we were married, they were keen on witnessing the haggling. “A birthday present for the wife,” they whispered to each other. Both Fadi and the
125

merchant played to the audience, and as their voices grew louder and their gesticulations grew wilder, I grew less comfortable.
“You are a thief!” Fadi screamed.
“One twenty five,” the merchant yelled in response.
When I left his side and pushed through the crowd of onlookers, Fadi did not even notice.
He was too engaged, too focused on a win. I skulked red-faced and shaking to the other side of the store where I hoped nobody would notice me. Nobody did. Everybody was engaged in the haggling at the counter. I peeked through displays of perfumes, expensive watch knock-offs, and a variety of electronics and cheap jewelry. I had never seen Fadi act so rude.
“For you,” I heard the merchant yell, “ninety dirhams. Last offer.”
“Seventy-five,” Fadi responded just as loudly.
“Eighty-five. Khalas (Finished)!” the man said. “I must feed my children.”
“Khalas,” Fadi agreed and reached out to shake the man’s hand. The crowd patted Fadi
on the back for a well-struck bargain, and he looked around for me to glory in his victory. “Come,” he waved me over to him. “Meet my friend.”
As I walked to the counter, the merchant wrapped my birthday present: Obsession by
Calvin Klein. Fadi laid out the eighty-five dirhams.
“Happy birthday, Madame Saeed,” he said without looking at me.
“Thank you,” I murmured.
Fadi left the store to the men shaking his hand and slapping him on the shoulders and the
back. “After all,” one of them said as we passed, “he could not be embarrassed in front of his wife.” Fadi considered the bartering the bulk of my birthday present; the Obsession was just an added bonus.
126

It was the first time I had watched a true battle for a bargain. I misunderstood it as rude, but the men involved—including my husband—recognized it as a contest to prove their masculinity and feral intelligence.
“The goal,” Fadi told me, “is to get it exactly right. Not too high; not too low. It’s a blessing to be fair.”
“How do you know when it’s right?” I asked.
“You’ll feel it,” he said. “Practice.”
So a few years and a lot of practice later, I showed up in the center of Ras al Khaimah to
buy my first abaya and hijab. Because I was not Muslim, I did not need to cover, as the Arabs called the wearing of the hijab. Unless I was entering a masjid for a celebration or a tour, I wore Western clothes that covered my arms and legs. Modesty was the key. But when the Emirati National Day of Independence rolled around and Westerners were expected to dress like nationals, I wanted to buy my first abaya and hijab as part of the costume. I already owned a classic Emirati ensemble, a beautifully blinged-out long blue dress with golden appliques and tight-at the-wrist sleeves. It was from the mother of a student.
“Your dress is lovely,” I said after my first month in the country.
She cleaned it and gifted it to me within 48 hours of my well-intentioned compliment. At that time in my tenure, I had not yet learned that Arabs considered compliments risky. They would bring the evil eye and all manner of melancholia and mayhem unless, at the time of the compliment, the speaker also said maasha’allah (God wills it). The tiny prayer was a talisman against the effects of envy. Unfortunately, I did not add it to my compliment for the mother of one of my students. So in an effort to avoid the evil eye, the mother gifted me the item. And
127

while I still feel embarrassed by the whole situation, I wore that dress to every National Day celebration. The year I added the abaya and hijab, I took Collin with me to the Pakistani souq.
“If you’re not sure if it’s a final price, walk away,” Fadi once told me about haggling. “If they’re willing to go lower, they’ll come after you.”
“What happens if they don’t?” I asked.
“Keep walking,” he said.
As it happened on the morning I was to buy the abaya, I did a lot of walking. It helped me
determine the just right price for an abaya and matching hijab, but it was making Collin anxious. In the third store after I had tried on my sixth or seventh abaya, I turned to Collin.
“Do you like this one?”
“Mom,” he whined. “Just pick one.”
“I want the right one,” I said.
“They’re all black,” he countered “They all look the same.”
“Good point,” I relented and bought the one I had in my hand. At a well negotiated price,
of course.
On the morning of National Day as I entered the school, nobody—not even the security
guards—knew me. I had worn sunglasses to cover my light blue eyes.
“La! La! La! (no! no! no!),” the hardcore, ex-military Jordanian guard yelled as I walked
through the gate.
I stopped and raised my arms while the guard shouted: “No mothers allowed.” The
commotion alerted the school’s front desk manager, Mr. Abdulla, who made his way to the gate. The boys in their gray and blue uniforms pushed passed watching the showdown between the
128

abaya-d mother and the Jordanian guard in military fatigues. As Mr. Abdulla approached, I lifted my sun glasses.
“Maasha’allah! (God wills it),” he yelled when he recognized me.
“Very beautiful . . . you,” the Jordanian security guard added in broken English. “Dress this all days,” he told me.
Even the students were surprised at my transformation, “Very good, miss,” they said, their thumbs up in the air. “Emirati now, yea?”
At the door to the school, the Emirati ladies from the main office waited for me, “Come,” they said and escorted me arm-in-arm into their inner sanctum for tea and a chat. “You look good,” they said. “Beautiful,” they added as they unwrapped and rewrapped my hijab.
Later in the day as we celebrated National Day with the students, I was awarded a gift card for being the best dressed Westerner; the boys in the school had voted unanimously after what amounted to a kind of camel auction where the foreigners were paraded across a makeshift stage. When I opened the gift card, my eyes had to adjust to a staggering amount of money. In a matter of seconds, I had daydreamed a whole new wardrobe until I looked again and understood it was linked to a store that sold abayas and hijabs.
“Good store. Best store,” one of the Emirati women told me.
“Good for three abayas,” one of the Emirati men said holding up three fingers. “Good ones,” he added and stopped before insulting the one I wore. I got the point though.
When I got back to Ras al Khaimah, I stopped to see Aliyah.
“I won this,” I said showing her the gift card.
“Maasha’allah,” she responded. “Too much.”
As she handed the card back to me, I shook my head and put my hand over hers.
129

“No, miss,” she said.
“Please, Aliyah.”
Aliyah walked away for a few minutes and returned with a bag of nine gift cards. “For
you,” she said.
“What?” I laughed. “Aliyah, no.”
“They’re from students. I won’t use them,” she said; Aliyah believed when they came
from students, they constituted bribes, not gifts.
Several of the cards in the gift bag were already expired; one of the cards, however, was
for a spa in my own little development. On the way home, I stopped at the spa for my first Moroccan bath. After checking in with the Pilipino women at the front desk, they introduced the Moroccan woman who would prepare and execute the hamam (the bath). She was named Rashida just like my first boss in the UAE. I worried the unfortunate name might be a bad omen for me. In Arabic, the name translated to one who knows her own way, and as I would find out, the name fit Rashida-of-the-hamam perfectly.
Rashida-of-the-hamam was a big, cheerful woman. She had almost no English, and my Arabic was not strong enough to take on her difficult Moroccan accent. Even though communication was hard between us, we did okay, Rashida and me. She led me down a hall to the hamam room. Colorful Moroccan tiles and glass and brass hanging lanterns highlighted the chocolate-colored cave-like walls and arch-shaped pillars; a large brass pan with etchings of Arabic inscriptions sat bolted to the floor at the foot of an elaborately carved rosewood chair. Emerald seat cushions sat ready in the chair and perfumed water with rose petals filled the pan underneath. Rashida-of-the-hamam singled for me to get undressed and then soak my feet.
“Wahed (one),” she said holding up her index finger as she left the room.
130

In the carved wooden lockers, there was a thick white, hotel-grade robe. I slipped out of my clothes, put on the robe, and moved to the rosewood chair and brass pan of rose-petaled water. A few seconds later, Rashida returned. She was naked. Completely naked. Absolutely naked. And I was not sure where to look. Rashida, on the other hand, showed no embarrassment whatsoever and, in fact, stood directly in front of me and laughed.
“La, la, la (no, no, no), she teased as she moved towards me. “Up,” she directed me with her arms.
I stood at her command. She was not the type of woman to be discounted or dismissed. While Rashida-of-the-hamam had a pleasant, jovial demeanor, she looked like the weight-lifting, child-terrifying principal, Miss Trunchbull, from the movie, Mathilda. Except Rashida-of-the- hamam was naked.
“Off,” she said as she took the robe. “For after,” she laughed and placed it back in the locker. “Come,” she said and pointed to a large ceramic table in the middle of a beautifully tiled shower and steam room. Inside the glass enclosure, there were brass showerheads, and Rashida- of-the-hamam had already steamed and prepared the room. I walked in tentatively, my arms crossed over my chest, underwear on.
“What these?” she asked snapping my undies and laughing again.
I sat on the edge of the table while Rashida filled bucket after bucket of warm, scented water and poured it over me. Apparently, shower heads were not used in hamams. At least, not in Rashida’s hamam. At least, not right away. The room was misty, almost hazy, and I relaxed in its fog and let Rashida-of-the-hamam do her work.
“Down,” she said and moved her hands to illustrate her command. “Like this?” I asked as I laid on my back.
131

“Good,” she said.
Rashida began speaking in a non-stop Moroccan-accented Arabic. I understood nothing except her first question.
“Araby (Do you speak Arabic)?” she asked.
“Shway. Shway (a little),” I answered her.
“Shway. Shway,” she laughed. “Good Araby!”
As I laid on the tiled table, Rashida rubbed me down with a muddy paste. It smelled
good, even comforting, but after a few moments, I felt the burn of it on my skin. Because I did not have the words to tell her, I laid silently and waited for the water. Prayed for it actually. Ten minutes went by, and my skin finally numbed to the burn. When she was ready, Rashida donned a loofah glove and began exfoliating. She rubbed so hard I thought she would draw blood; the pain especially when she worked on my legs and around my neck was almost unbearable, but she continued to talk in a chipper, deep-throated Arabic, and I did not have the heart to distract her. Instead, I tried a meditation technique of closing my eyes and seeing myself elsewhere. It did not work, and I could feel layers of skin peeling away from my body.
When she finished, she slapped my shoulder and motioned for me to turn over. There, we began the whole process all over again. She exfoliating; me trying to meditate the pain away.
Why do they do this? I thought of the Arabic women who were frequent hamam goers. I should have bought the abayas instead, I chastised myself.
For months, my friends had pushed me to have a haram. They swore by it as part of both their health and beauty regimens.
“Three times a week,” my friend, Aliyah, told me. “Go three times a week.”
132

As Rashida rubbed and scraped the first few layers of skin from my calves, she began to sing, and I began to feel the tears. Not from her singing.
“Boo-tee-fool,” she said poking my legs. “Up.”
Rashida pulled my mud-stained, pink-tinged body off the table.
“Look,” she said pointing to where I had just been.
There, on the table were piles of dirty grey filings. Like the body outline at the scene of a
crime, Rashida had brilliantly pulled the skin from my body in an almost perfect outline of me. She turned a bucket over and motioned for me to sit. Then, like a mother would do for her child, she pulled up my hair into a bun.
“Boo-tee-fool,” she said again and smiled.
Rashida turned the shower heads on in the room and gently, lovingly washed the mud and any remaining skin from my body. She pulled down my hair and washed it, padded it dry, and repulled the bun on the top of my head. When she was done, she cleaned the table, and I watched as the no-longer-attached-to-me skin slid down the drains in the floor. Then, she motioned for me to return to the table where she bathed me in sweet-smelling oils. Rashida moistened a cloth and placed it over my eyes. “Sleep,” she said. The room was warm with steam and hot lamps. I slept and dreamt.
“Up! Boo-tee-fool,” Rashida said after some time.
I was stiff from laying so long on the tiled table, so Rashida gently guided me to the upside-down bucket under the shower heads. She washed off the oil with warm, steamy water and then wrapped me in an enormously plush white towel. Fresh water with rose petals awaited me, and Rashida brushed my hair as I soaked my feet. When she finished, she left me alone to recover. My skin had a nuclear glow; it was soft, pink, and tingling. My whole body was relaxed;
133

all tension had spiraled down the floor drains with my old skin. When I was ready to move—and it took some time—I got dressed and made my way to the front desk where Rashida-of-the- hamam was waiting. This time, she was fully clothed; I almost did not recognize her.
“You like?” she asked.
“Nam (yes),” I said smiling and shaking my head vigorously.
And it was true. Despite all the pain I had felt during the hamam, I felt more worn out
than I had ever been and more beautiful too. Rashida-of-the-hamam handed me an appointment card. I was scheduled to return a week later. When my look suggested a question, Rashida answered.
“Too much bad,” she said touching my skin. “More hamam,” she offered as the cure.
When she showed me her price, I moved to bargain, but remembered I would see her again in a week. I considered the loofah and retreated before beginning the negotiations. Instead, I handed her the full two hundred dirham gift card and dug out a forty dirham tip from my purse.
“Shukran (thank you),” she smiled, placing the gift card in the register and the two twenties down her bosom.
Later, Fadi said I had paid too much. “For hamam?” he asked. “No good.” “Was it supposed to hurt?” I asked.
“Of course,” Fadi replied. “Next time tell her one hundred. Final offer.” “No way,” I told him. “I can’t.”
While I only wore my abaya and hijab one more time in the UAE, I continued to visit Rashida-of-the-hamam. Each time I cringed and cried when she scrubbed the dead skin from my body, but each time I left feeling renewed. Like the phoenix, Rashida-of-the-hamam helped me
134

become the woman I was becoming by ridding me of the old. And, when I knew her well enough, I began bargaining over the price of the hamam.
“Good,” she said. “Now you Araby.”
No matter how much the service cost though, I always slipped Rashida-of-the-hamam two twenties which she dutifully took and then stored in her bra for safe-keeping.
135

Learning to Focus on the Profound, not the Trivial
As the days lengthened and summer threatened, Rashida called a meeting for all principals and vice principals. We were forced to travel to the southernmost part of the country— Abu Dhabi, but I lived at its northernmost tip—Ras al Khaimah. Dubai sat at the almost midpoint of the journey, and it was in Dubai were the country’s traffic bottlenecked. The trick to avoiding the quagmire was to leave Abu Dhabi before 3:00PM. Not a minute after and, at least, a minute before; it was the only way to beat the rush hour traffic.
“Can we leave by 3:00?” a colleague asked Rashida as the meeting was winding down. “To beat the traffic around Dubai,” she explained.
“Who agreed to this?” she sniped.
It had always been a tacit agreement between us and Rashida, and we looked around at each other side-eyed to see who would tell her what she already knew. Finally, another American spoke up.
“It could take hours,” he said cautiously, “if we don’t leave on time.”
“What a shame,” Rashida evil-smiled; “I live ten minutes away.”
It was one thing to abide by an unspoken agreement, something we had always quietly
expected; it was another thing to appear as if we questioned her authority. On that day, Rashida thought she had sniffed out a potential coup; she felt her power had been threatened by a question, and she reacted swiftly. If there was anything Rashida was good at, it was retaliation. Like stepping on an insect, Rashida quashed any idea of leaving on time. Rather than discuss important matters, she regaled us with stories from her old Physics classroom, and as the tension around the table increased, her glee positively grew. The meeting ended late. Of course it did.
“Enjoy your drive,” she said all sugar and smiles. “Be safe on the road.”
136

Without exchanging the requisite pleasantries with coworkers and higher-ups, I left the table and sprinted for my little red Nissan; I would not—no matter what—stop for food or go to the bathroom, regardless of how much I needed either or both. Instead, I had one intent—and one intent only; I would try to beat the traffic around Dubai, so I could get home at a reasonable time. In the car, I re-litigated Rashida’s spite, and anger pulsated through my veins, coloring my face crimson, making my breath ragged.
“Be safe on the road,” I mimicked in a Lebanese-laced American accent. “My physics classroom was excellent; very few passed my class,” I added in the same accent.
While I fanned my irritation, the world around me burst with beauty. In a brilliant clash of colors, the late afternoon sky began its transfer of power to the oncoming night; the handoff began just I entered the bottom of Dubai. The call to prayer—the melodic invocation of the muezzin to the faithful—proclaimed the name of God to all within earshot. The Arabic word— Allah—rippled from and through the tall minaret towers of Dubai; there was something so satisfying in the daily ritual and timings of the call, and it would have soothed me if I had not been so enraged. Through the open skylight of the car, the sweetness of desert blooms that scented the early evening air—the bougainvillea and hibiscus mostly—wafted in and around the car, and although my senses were under assault, I was too busy being angry to notice.
“WHAT IS THE POINT?” I yelled out to no one.
I considered asking God for a sign that I was doing the right thing, living in the right place, feeling the right way, but I was too out-of-sorts from Rashida’s response to form the thought into action. While miracles were abundant all around—the purple-blue of the sky as daylight faded into night, the shooting stars in a desert sky, a lumbering camel, a kitschy skyline, the sparkle of the Gulf—they had all gone unnoticed. By me.
137

On my way into Dubai proper, the open sands of the desert waved and rolled just off the side of the highway. I turned towards it and noticed buses parked just off the road and in front of the camel fences; dozens and dozens and dozens of them merited my attention. Their occupants—mostly poor Pakistani laborers in long cotton shifts and baggy matching cotton pants—had spilled out and onto the tiny spit of land hemmed in on one side by the busy highway and, on the other, by the endless sands of the sprawling desert. Far out into the sculpted dunes, the sun had dropped low, and its fire-red was gradually, grudgingly submitting to the deep, deep blues of the coming night.
Beautiful, I thought, finally noticing what I had too long ignored: the glitter of white desert sands in waning daylight, the sweet sound of the muezzin’s prayer, the perfume of the desert, the shriek of birds dipping and diving on the wind. The spectacle on the side of the road penetrated the anger I had nursed since leaving Abu Dhabi.
“Thank you,” I whispered to the rows and rows of humble men who helped break the trance.
As I watched, the men moved as one from a kneeling-squat position to one in which their foreheads touched the ground. In submission. To God. After a few moments, they moved to standing. Together as one, they moved again to place their foreheads back on the ground between the highway and the desert sands. And once more, they lifted their foreheads and moved to a standing position. The movements were not so much choreographed, practiced; they were simply pure, devotional, heartfelt. The enormous disc of the setting sun lit the synchronized dance from behind. At that singular moment, the men were not hundreds, but one. A beating, reverent, single heart in prayer.
138

“My God,” I whispered, and the deeply profound moment seared itself into my heart, my mind, my soul. “Forgive me,” I whispered for my foolishness.
Although I had not beaten the traffic around Dubai, I had been given the chance to witness the sign that I did not have the good sense to ask for, but that the universe had provided all the same. It made me laugh that Rashida had been the conduit for what I had just experienced. In spite of her need to be nasty, Rashida had given me a gift, and I earned it with the extra hours in the car. Although I thanked Rashida for her role in what played out in front of me, I still did not like her. No miracle would change that. But I did realize that I chose how much energy I would give to her, and so I excised Rashida from my mind as I drove the desert highway.
“Al hamdulillah (Thank God),” I whispered in tribute to the workers and to the sunset, the beauty of the desert, the profound belief in God in the spiced air I breathed. “Al hamdulillah,” I whispered a little louder to note the contrast with the peace I felt, a peace that had been missing for most of the day, for all of my drive. “Al hamdulillah,” I said out loud. This is my path, I thought, but I did not mean the road from Abu Dhabi to Ras al Khaimah.
By the middle of my second year in the UAE, my time with Rashida was finally coming to an end. The trip to the meeting in Abu Dhabi was not my last, but it was one of the last. In a few months, I would leave the school system in which she reigned—still reigns—as the iron- fisted, mean-mouthed matriarch. Fadi remained, of course, so Rashida would still cast a shadow in our lives. But my new job at Canadian University Dubai would be a time of more professional independence and satisfaction, especially as I was tapped to help run a special needs school.
Protesting was not especially the norm in the UAE which is, after all, run by an authoritarian ruler. A sheikh. A king. People feared deportation or worse, time in a prison deep in
139

the desert. There, the guards challenged inmates to escape; they knew it would be the rare soul who would make it out alive. But I was growing increasingly worried about the elections in my own country, and I felt impotent in my inability to protest against the ugly rhetoric of Donald Trump. One day at my new job, I complained about being too far away to make a difference.
“Write I hate Trump on your shirt,” the Pilipino office manager told me. It was her way of encouraging me to be on the school’s team for The Color Run.
So early one Saturday morning, I rolled out of bed and drove to Dubai to participate in the 5K run. The Color Run was billed as “the happiest run on earth,” and people dressed in costumes to match the billing—mostly pink or multi-colored or sequined tutus or clown suits. The usually conservative-dressing Arab men sported all manner of not-so-conservative dress. Sikhs ran in turbans, Emiratis in abaya, hijab, and sneakers, Filipinos in short shorts. Americans wrapped themselves in American flags, and Saudis wrapped themselves in Saudi flags. Like some kind of Austin Powers knock-off, Brits came decked out in high tube socks and 1970- inspired running shorts while Nigerians sported the vibrant hues of pan-African power in reds and blacks and greens. Just as the office manager promised, the dissolution of all manner of normal during the run allowed protest to happen under cover. And it did. One Arab man wore a green foam crown and carried a torch; a light green toga-like material was draped across shoulders and torso. As a pseudo-Statue of Liberty, the man safety-pinned a simple sign to his back. FREEDOM, it pleaded.
I played it safe and did not protest Trump because I knew which side the Emiratis were on. Just outside my new office at the university, a sand-colored camouflaged mosque sat across the street and, next to that, sat the post office for downtown Dubai. One morning after paying for an airmail stamp, the manager of the branch office in full white kandura, white head scarf and
140

black wrapped cord stepped out of the back room and took the envelope I had just handed the clerk.
“What is this?” he asked.
“It’s my ballot for the presidential election,” I answered, trying to be vague. “American?” he asked.
“Nam (Yes),” I said switching to Arabic, hoping to change the conversation. It did not
work.
“Who did you vote for?” he asked.
There are few things drilled so deeply into the American psyche as the secret nature of
one’s vote. It is an almost religious belief. So when the Emirati manager asked, I felt the hair on the back of my neck stand at attention, and I spent a few seconds searching for a way to respond appropriately.
“Who?” he asked again shaking my ballot.
“Clinton,” I answered.
He smiled, held the envelope up to the light, and traced its outlines.
“Clinton?” he asked.
“I don’t believe in the Muslim ban,” I tried to explain my choice.
“Hmm,” he said pocketing my envelope in his kandura. “I will take special care of this.” I knew, without a doubt, my vote would never make it to the US. Airmail stamp or not.
We own Trump, I heard playing over and over again through my mind; it was a memory from conversations with so many Emiratis. They own Trump, I thought as I watched the manager pocket my ballot. I sunk the uneasy feeling, forced a smile at the manager, and left for the university.
141

Thousands of people participated the The Color Run. Thousands. Being competitive, I had spent weeks training. I wanted to do well in front of my new colleagues. For most of the participants, however, the color run was more like the color walk. And many of them—if not most of them—cheated, cutting across fields instead of running the designated paths. No one cared. It was early fall and still hot in Dubai. And, anyway, creative cheating was part of the fun; in the Middle East, cheating was practiced as one might practice an Olympic sport.
The only real rule of the run was to check in at the color stations that occurred every half kilometer or so. There, like the pivotal moments of any Bollywood movie, colored sand was blown into the air, and as it filtered down over the heads of participants, it covered them in a color rainbow—first yellow, then blue, then pink, orange, green, purple, and so on. A cornucopia of color matted the hair of participants, stained their shirts, and dyed their skin in kaleidoscopic shades. The symbolism was obvious. At least for the time of the run, color was only skin deep.
And among the costumes and colors, protest was cleverly hidden. Under the American flags that wrapped some runners, signs were safety-pinned to shirts that protested Trump. Women protested domestic abuse, and Palestinians protested their inability to become citizens. One group of Westerners—mostly Brits and Australians—stayed together in a pack. They protested the plight of the laborers treated like slaves in the UAE. Their signs of protest contrasted mightily with the colors of the happiest run on earth. It was at The Color Run that I realized Trump was just one peg in a larger social phenomenon. He, like others, courted division among people. I looked around at all the differences in the race—all the different races—and under all the smiles and laughter and colored sand, it occurred to me how much we shared. How similar we all were. And it got me thinking about the men I had seen praying on my way from home to Ras al Khaimah from Abu Dhabi through Dubai.
142

As I ran The Color Run and noticed the mini protests, I remembered the Pakistani laborers who prayed on a spit of land between the desert and the busy road around Dubai. While I shielded my eyes from the blue color cloud raining down around me at a color station, I recalled the smell of desert winds and the look of the setting sun as I threaded my way around Dubai on the desert highway. In my mind, I heard the long sonorous Allah, and the feel of my little red Nissan rounding a bend to see the extraordinary skyline of Dubai. The sight never lost its shock value, no matter how many times I rounded that same bend to the same sight. But it was the men on the side of the road when the sun sat huge on the desert sand and framed them in fire that had impacted me the most. Their simple act trivialized the petty and focused me on the profound. And the protestors at The Color Run forced me to put my own concerns in a more logical order. It was not Trump that sat at the heart of my protest; it was division, and the humble men who prayed as one on the side of the road gave me the hope that, at our very core, we understood our similarities, our connection.
143

A Kind of Artificially Self-Imposed Awareness of Want
As I write, it is Friday here in the UAE, the first day of a two-day weekend. Since Friday is the Muslim version of the Christian Sunday, the meaning of TGIF has a slightly more spiritual focus here. In this majority Muslim country, Friday is truly a time for thanking God. Literally. Al Hamdulillah, Arabs say and mean. And indeed, this particular Friday holds special religious significance; it is the day before Islam’s holiest time. Signs of Ramadan Kareem (Blessed Ramadan) are everywhere as the population readies for the month-long religious celebration. While people seem giddy with the coming of the holiday, I feel more and more anxious, not so celebratory.
Ramadan is a time of fasting. From before the sun rises (4AM) until the call to prayer at sunset (7:00PM), no food or drink is consumed. None. Zero. In addition, all bad habits are strictly forbidden during the fasting times. No smoking, for example; not even a puff. Not one. While it may be possible to weather any hardship for a single day, Ramadan requires that the fast be repeated every single day throughout every second of the fifteen plus daily fasting hours for approximately thirty days. Since the desert heat can reach temperatures of more than 115 degrees with no reprieve for water—not a sip, Ramadan becomes a celebration of extreme sacrifice.
This is a time for building empathy, as all people live in poverty and lack—even if it is self-imposed during the hours of fasting. The understanding that comes as a result of such deprivation is supposed to increase one’s sense of shared responsibility for all humanity; in other words, it is a kind of artificially self-imposed awareness of want. The goal is to arouse subsequent positive action for the neediest among us. A beautiful spiritual concept, I think, a concept that can open up multiple paths to God, the Divine, the Creator.
144

Although I am not mandated by the government to follow the fast, I am asked to be mindful of those around me who are observing it. This involves almost everyone, including most of my friends and colleagues, my neighbors, students, even my husband. Since so many are engaged in the fast, it is not hard to assess the impact of this religious practice on society. I have grown to love the wholesale softening of the community around me, a community that takes a month-long break from its focus on busy lives, work schedules, commutes, and insular views and beliefs to look outward for a little while. In so doing, the normally-overlooked Other comes into focus, compelling some to recognize the unity in our shared humanity. At least for a month, the sacrifice of Ramadan brings about positive, societal and soul-level change. “It is God’s will,” my Muslim friends and colleagues and husband say. “Yes,” I agree completely, thinking about the celebration’s potential for profound social change.
Since moving here to the Middle East, I have tried to observe the fast. It is not easy. While Muslims around me seem positively gleeful at the prospect of beginning the holy month tomorrow, I am petrified and, to be honest, I have felt this way since the last day of last year’s final day of Ramadan. Oh my God, I thought on that last day of fasting, I have to do this again in eleven months. I will not lie; it is the hardest thing I have ever done.
My husband tells me to approach fasting with “an open heart;” if I do, God will help me with the coming thirty days of sacrifice. While I completely understand the spiritual concept behind my husband’s religious belief, I sit writing in a little café—Shakespeare and Company— eating my last mid-day meal until the end of June. Today I relish every bite, the colors, the taste, the smells, the textures, as if this meal will be my last. It will not be; I will survive the month of fasting. Maybe even thrive.
145

Taking on the challenge of Ramadan is my way of opening myself up spiritually to a new kind of connection to God, the Divine, the Creator. It is one of dedicated sacrifice and action. So tomorrow I will start the fast with an open heart and a dual intention: I will experience the hunger and thirst of the Other, and I will work hard to remember to act on this experience throughout the year. Insha’allah (God willing), say the Arabs to fortify an intention with God’s power.
Today, however, I’ll order dessert. “Waiter!”
146

God Hears
There were days in the UAE when I drove more than I slept. No kidding. I lived at the northernmost tip of the United Arab Emirates and worked in its most famous city, Dubai. While the miles between home and work were reasonable—60 miles—the traffic was not. Like any major metropolitan area, Dubai had a network of highways that filled to a breaking point during the getting-to-work and getting-to-home hours. In addition, there was only one main highway that ran from north to south, cutting the vast, empty desert in half. On each side of the well- maintained modern road system was a mountain of sand, sculpted and shaped by the wind into desert dunes. There were camels who roamed the desert feasting on the sagebrush-looking vegetation who, on occasion, made their way onto the highway. When they did, everything stopped. Killing a camel would cost you much more than killing a human being, so no one took the chance.
Each morning, I left early enough—usually 4:30AM—to minimize the time in the car by trying to beat the traffic. While it was an excellent strategy, it usually did not work. Still, on the rare occasion that it did and since it was the only strategy I had, I continued to do it. And hope. Depending on what was going on in Dubai, the drive could take two or three hours. One particularly bad day, it took me four hours, half of the regular work day. And that was just one way; I still had to work a full day and, then, drive the sixty miles home. In traffic.
If there was one thing I had in endless supply, it was an eternal sense of optimism, so in the spring of my third year, I jumped in the car after work and hoped for a relatively short drive home. It was not the night for hope, however; in fact, the drive would take much longer than normal. In the thick of the traffic—five lanes on either side of the highway, I watched the temperature gauge on my dashboard go from C to H. Soon after, the car lurched in the bumper-
147

to-bumper start-and-stop traffic, and smoke rose from the engine. When flames shot out, I pulled off the side of the road and called my husband.
“The engine’s on fire!” I screamed into the mobile; admittedly, it was not the best way to begin a conversation.
“What?” my husband asked.
“The engine’s on fire!”
“On fire?!” he screamed into the phone.
“Yes. Fire! What should I do?” I asked breathlessly. I needed him to propose a rational
plan; in my present panic, I had been unable to formulate one myself. Precious seconds slipped away as he thought.
“I’m coming,” he finally said, muttering a prayer in Arabic as he hung up the phone.
At the same moment, a car pulled up and a young man exited, walking towards me. A Palestinian man named Ishmael, I would learn over the next two hours.
“Turn off the engine,” he yelled. “Turn it off.”
I had not considered it before he said and, in fact, still sat inside the car in the air conditioning, unwilling to step out into the desert heat. But once he said it, I recognized it as obvious and followed his instructions. Exiting the car, I fumbled with my phone to call emergency: 1-1-9.
“Asalaam aluaikum,” I greeted the dispatcher in Arabic; “do you speak English?”
“A little,” he said, and I knew the call would be difficult.
Ishmael sensed the issue, reached for, and without my permission, took the phone. He
asked the dispatcher for assistance, got the number for a tow truck, and proceeded to call the garage and bargain for a good price—a must in the Arab culture despite the circumstances; in
148

fact, bargaining was darn near an Olympic sport. Hundreds of cars on the highway moved slowly past while I watched—trance-like—as a stranger took charge of my life. As he said his goodbye to the dispatcher—maa salaama, Fadi called. Ishmael answered.
“I told your husband to meet us in Ajman; traffic is too bad to come here,” Ishmael explained when he hung up the phone after talking to my husband.
“He said okay?” I asked.
“Yeah. I’ll take care of the police and the tow truck, and I’ll drive you to Fadi.”
“Thank you,” I said a little nervously.
“Your husband?” he smiled at me.
“Yeah?”
“I like him,” Ishmael smiled; “he’s Palestinian.”
Two hours later, Ishmael drove me to Ajman. To Fadi. The two men spoke a few minutes
in Arabic as I collected my belongings. They interacted as if they had always known each other. When they finished and I had stored my computer and purse in Fadi’s car, I turned to Ishmael.
“You’re so kind,” I said. “You didn’t have to do what you did tonight.”
“It’s from Allah,” he told me, embarrassed by my gratitude. “If my wife has a problem, someone like Fadi will do the same for her. Allah will see to it.”
“Insha’allah (God willing),” Fadi said.
“Insha’allah,” Ishmael repeated, and the two men shook hands as old friends.
In the car, I told Fadi the whole story in one breathless release. “It’s weird. Just as I hung
up from you, he pulled over. Like this,” I said, snapping my fingers.
Fadi seemed unimpressed with the timing. I looked at him, the question in my eyes. “Well I asked God to send help,” he explained matter-of-factly.
149

“He acted pretty fast,” I said with a hint of sarcasm. “So Ishmael was sent by God?” “Of course,” Fadi said.
“How did you know he wouldn’t hurt me?” I asked.
“When he said his name, I knew he was the answer to my prayer.”
“His name?” I asked confused.
“It’s Ishmael,” Fadi explained in a way that said I should have known. “Abraham’s son?” I asked, trying to figure out the significance. “Yes,” Fadi answered; “Ibrahim’s son.”
“And?” I asked my husband, still not understanding how he knew. “Ishmael means Allah hears.
150

Unbearable
Heat has no meaning outside of the unbearable heat of the Arabian Gulf. When the temperature gauge hovers at the 110 or 120 degree mark, the gulf boils, and the air becomes heavy with its swirling, saturating steam and sand byproduct. As the deadly desert heat is trapped and magnified by this humidity, unbearable finally makes sense. People move their lives inside where the steady hum of air conditioning overtakes the heartbeat as life’s most significant sound. The ubiquitous tan-colored camel wanders through hazy heat like a long-necked mirage on a shimmering hot horizon, and feral, hunch-backed cats meow on shaded marble entryways and rub against wooden doors hoping for entry. All life slows down. There is no fresh air, no opened windows, no breeze to be had; during the time of the deadliest heat, lungs burn in an attempt to pluck their modicum of life-giving breath from the intensity of the sun’s ruinous reign. This is summer on the Arabian Peninsula.
But after a few months of winter when the weather reaches an almost perfect combination of cloudless cerulean blue skies and temperatures that invite all living things outdoors, people are tempted to forget about the desert heat. Like overlooking the pain of labor immediately after the birth of a child, it is really hard to remember how mercilessly hot hot is; the winter produces a kind of heat amnesia. But no one ever really forgets; instead, the memory of the mind-numbing, soul-crushing hotness is submarined deep inside allowing residents to revel in the cooler season. At least, for a little while. Memory surfaces from time to time, emanating a kind of karmic reminder, a payment coming due for the near perfection of bright blue sunny days.
In my second year in the UAE, there was a good run of winter weather that lasted into May. The locals and expats in the country held their collective breath, waiting for the inevitable. It will come, we told ourselves so when it did, we would survive the shock. We squeezed in extra
151

walks on the beach and trips to outdoor souqs (bazaars). We kept the AC off and opened windows a little wider. Plugged in a fan. Sat in our gardens at midday. In those days, we lived to defy the heat. Come on, we taunted it; see if you can deter us from living our lives outside, knowing, in the end, it would. The threat of summer heat paralyzed us with fear even when we pretended it did not. But in that same year, Americans were plagued with fears more terrifying than desert heat as our country prepared for an election. We watched, stupefied by the word salad spilling from a reality TV star turned pseudo-politician.
“He didn’t just say that, did he?” we Americans asked each other. “Ban Muslims?”
Living abroad as we did, his words brought danger; “be aware of your surroundings” we were warned in texts and emails from the State Department. Americans became targets because of the hate spewing from the mouth of an American almost-politician. A woman was stabbed in a mall bathroom in Abu Dhabi simply because she was American; others were taunted and terrorized by extremists in response to Trump’s words. Our friends and associates of Muslim faith tried to make sense of who we were, how we fit into the greater American context, what part of Trumpism laid in each of us.
“He’ll never win the nomination,” we told them and each other and ourselves.
Our arguments were logical. Sensible. Even at a time when American politics seemed to have lost all notion of logical and sensible, Americans, we told each other, would stand up for what is right. We would overcome nationalistic ugliness. Yet, as the desert heated up, our worst fears were realized, and Donald Trump coasted to the Republican party’s nomination. So far away from home, we could only watch what was happening. As bad as it was to note the coming of the desert heat, the news coming from home seemed worse. Unbearable, really.
152

Despite Trump, life carried on. We pushed the impending doom of his nomination to the farthest reaches of our minds and confronted the onset of insufferable summer heat. A few times during my tenure in Dubai, the city held the dubious and deadly honor of being the hottest place on earth. In theory, then, the Sahara Desert felt cooler when Dubai glowed from its heat-sucking concrete and stove-top-hot steel. In the summer, the trees of the famous tree-lined avenues died. Or almost died. Flowers wilted, their purple or red or pink faces hid from the sun by bending close to the intestine-like water system at their feet. People wilted too. Only air conditioning kept us alive. It was a lesson I learned during my first year in exile when the Federal Electricity and Water Authority called me.
FEWA:
JACKIE:
FEWA:
JACKIE:
When I first objected to the appointment, I was sitting in my Frigidaire-inspired inside
Salaam, Madame Jackie, come to the office tomorrow morning. Oh, sorry; I can’t. I have work.
Come tomorrow or no electricity.
I’ll be there.
world suffering from heat amnesia; once the FEWA man threatened to cut the electricity, however, I submitted. I understood the importance of electricity. In fact, I had five electricity accounts, I was told. One account listed me as the sole owner; four accounts listed me and the names of four different husbands—none of whom were my actual husband. Because I liked the name—Jassem Abdulaziz Al Shehhi—I considered keeping one of the accounts. Until I saw the staggering amount I would owe as Madame Al Shehhi.
The FEWA agent, a middle manager from Egypt, affected an air of self-importance, a need to put an American in her place. How dare she come without one of her husbands, he must
153

have thought. He looked me up and down without a shred of decency and grinned; “four husbands,” he crooned and licked his lips.
JACKIE: May I see the accounts?
FEWA: Of course, habibti.
I rolled my eyes. Habibti was a word reserved for a close loved one, and FEWA man
knew it. He was testing me.
After 16 years without a husband in which I worked and raised my children as a single
mom, I had the sudden realization I was now blessed with five. FIVE husbands. I should have come here earlier, I thought. Unfortunately, the four fake husbands had racked up some serious electrical bills, and it was time for a divorce. Or two. Or four.
JACKIE:
FEW A:
JACKIE:
FEW A:
Creepy FEWA man sidled up next to me, winking. I pushed him away and opened my
None of these men are my husband.
They are listed on your accounts; they are yours. It’s impossible to be married to all of them. (lip-licking) American.
phone to the copy of my marriage certificate. Living in a culture that is so overtly sexist, I had it ready for just these kinds of emergencies. The certificate was in Arabic, so I could not attest to its veracity, but I showed it to the FEWA man and used a bit of smug confidence to seal the deal.
JACKIE: Are you satisfied?
FEWA: Prove the others aren’t your husbands.
What? Although I was set for a battle, I realized that as a woman who did not speak
Arabic, the seemingly impossible matter could be cleared up more quickly if I turned to a man
154

who did. Equality be damned; I was looking for a quick resolution. So, I dialed Fadi. “Give him the phone,” he said when I explained the situation.
FADI: FEW A: FADI: FEW A: FADI: FEW A: FADI:
So my wife has four other husbands?
(smugly) You are a man who cannot satisfy his wife.
Yes, it would be embarrassing.
(very smugly) It is embarrassing.
You must think judges in this country must allow it then.
(smugness fading fast) Well . . . no sir.
We’ll tell the judge you think he’s broken the laws of the country and his
religion to grant my wife five husbands.
Fadi knew and I knew and the FEWA man knew that if Fadi did call the judge who
married us, the FEWA man would be deported. Back to Egypt and away from his cushy middle management position.
FEW A:
FADI:
FEW A:
The case was closed. And in one fell swoop on a wickedly hot day in the UAE, I received
(smugness gone) Let’s settle this like men.
You want proof? I’ll call the judge, man. I will.
Sir, I think your call is sufficient. You are her husband.
a quadruple divorce. I expected some kind of settlement from each of my fake ex-husbands—a camel or a couple of goats, at least—but I received nothing at the dissolution of our four fake marriages except, of course, FEWA did not cut my electricity, and I survived the summer.
A year later, I had an appointment with the Foreign Affairs Ministry. While Dubai is an easy city to drive around and through, finding a parking place is another thing altogether. So
155

scoring a place only 500 meters (1/3 of a mile) from the ministry was a remarkable feat, something to be celebrated even if it meant walking the distance in 125 degree weather.
To survive the stifling wet heat and to avoid a wrong turn, I set up Google Maps on my phone and watched the meters tick off with my forward motion. I moved stealthily from shadow to shadow, those cast from trees, buildings, parked cars, even gates. At 100 meters in, I felt the heat of the summer sidewalk. At 200 meters, despite the acrobatic shadow-walking, I felt the burn on the bottoms of my feet. At 300 meters, I switched to walking on the sides of my feet to relieve the searing pain. By 400 meters, I felt blisters forming, and by the time I reached security at the front doors of the ministry, the heat of the hot summer sidewalk had eaten holes through the bottom of my shoes and covered my feet in burns and blisters.
With my red-flamed face and clothes soaked in sweat, I side-walked my way into the ministry. Once inside, I checked the damage. Obliterated. No chance of rescuing either my shoes or my feet. Damn, I thought, they were brand new. The shoes, not the feet. Still, I made my way through the inefficient and ineffective hoops of UAE administrivia. First, I waited in line to purchase with my regular debit card a special debit card to pay for services. Then, I waited in line to get stamps—Emiratis love stamps—to certify the educational degrees that had already been certified and stamped by a notary of the public, the Attorney General of Pennsylvania, the Secretary of State for the US (the John Kerry), and the UAE Embassy in Washington, DC. After the Foreign Ministry’s stamp, I used my new ministry-specific debit card to pay, and then, I waited in line for a representative of the Ministry to sign the newly affixed stamps. Two and a half hours into the bureaucratic fol-de-rol, my feet were a hot mess of burns and blisters that, on the walk back to the car, would be exposed to the sizzling sidewalk through the mostly melted underside of my shoes.
156

I limped the long walk down the air-conditioned hallway of the ministry to the front door; a shooting, throbbing pain radiated from the bottoms of my feet up my legs and back down again. At the opening of the main door, a wave of heat hit me, sandblasting the open wounds on my feet. I knew I could not walk the 500 meters back to my car. No way. Not a chance. Before I had formulated a plan, however, the security guard closed and locked the gates, stranding a crowd of foreigners outside and trapping me inside the outside courtyard.
“You have to stay,” he told me.
“What?”
“We’re closed.”
For a few seconds, I looked perplexed, my head tilted in a dog roll; then, I realized the
hot sun must have dried up my sense of humor even as it soaked my back with sweat. The three hours I had just spent in bureaucratic hell did not help. I smiled at the guard, cautiously, just in case I was wrong about the joke thing.
“Do you have food?” I asked.
“What?”
“You’ll have to cook if I stay.”
He laughed, “No cooking here,” he said opening the gate. “Go.” Out on the street, I hailed a taxi. To go 500 meters.
Three minutes later, I paid too much for the ride, got into my car, headed to the Dubai Mall where the floor to ceiling blue-light of the aquarium lit up the inside, bought Band-Aids to repair the bottoms of my feet, and new shoes to take me through summer.
157

As the fall brought drier, though not cooler weather, the election in the US heated up. In the UAE, papers openly flouted the connection between the Saudi and Emirati elite to the aging star of The Apprentice. Trump had long had a footprint in the UAE’s most famous city; his name was on buildings and developments. He had “friends” in the country who funded his properties and bought his name for others.
“We own him,” Emiratis of high standing would say. “We bought and paid for him.”
My Russian friends and associates and the diplomat father of one of my students touted Trump’s connections to their strongman leader. In fact, the Russian mafia with their foothold in the UAE had announced Putin’s preference for Trump. They winked as if they were in the know when Americans poo-pooed their predictions.
“Trump is Putin’s puppet,” one Russian man told me on a bus to Abu Dhabi. “Trump is strong,” a Russian diplomat proclaimed. “Not like Obama,” he winced. While most Americans watched the results of the 2016 election late into the night, I
listened in the early morning from my office at the university.
“Mom,” Katlyn called. “Pennsylvania is going for Trump.”
“It won’t happen,” I assured her. “It will go blue in the end.” It did not.
As night in the US wore on and morning in the UAE turned into early afternoon, I headed
to a three-hour class just as the election was called.
“Miss?” the students asked as I entered the classroom. “What did you do?”
My class was a beautiful mix of Emiratis in traditional dress, Russians and Kazakhs, a
variety of Arabs—Jordanians, Lebanese, an Iraqi—Nigerians, South Africans, two Yemeni sisters, a few Pakistanis and several Canadians. It was a taste of the world in one room.
158

“Miss, what did you do?” they asked again, looking to me as a representative of all Americans.
“I don’t know,” I responded. “I feel like someone threw my heart on the floor, stomped on it several times, twisted it, and put it back in my chest.”
“Miss, why do Americans hate Muslims?” one Emirati woman asked.
“We don’t hate Muslims,” I answered and felt humiliated and sick at such a question. As I addressed my students, my phone pinged out condolences on WhatsApp. Emojis of
American flags and praying hands poured in. They helped to quell my anxious breathing, broken heart, and confused students. At least, a little.
May Allah shine his face on America, one said.
Good Bless America, read another; I particularly liked the symbolic misspelling.
Don’t lose hope, a Jordanian friend urged, remember a greater Hand is at work here. Even as I tried to take solace from my friends’ messages, I used their wording to comfort
my students.
“Doctor?” a young Kazakh called.
“Farengis, yes?”
“Why doesn’t Obama just change the law?”
“That’s worse,” I responded.
“But you like Obama?” she asked.
“Putin wanted Trump,” a Russian boy added at the same time.
“I love Obama,” I nodded at Farengis, and then to Valeriy, “Not too crazy about Putin
though.”
159

Everyone laughed. They had read the reports of Putin trying to affect the US election and learned the word rig which they had been using for everything: the book is rigged, the test is rigged, the university it rigged. Even nine time zones away, Trump’s words had been heard loud and clear. My students internalized them, learned the wrong lessons of America, and believed, as a result, that Americans were hateful.
Farengis pressed me, “Miss, our president changed the law. Now he’s the president for life,” she said with pride.
Students smiled at the common sense and efficiency of Farengis’ president, and I felt compelled to explain the value Americans placed on the peaceful transfer of power. When I finished, I realized the students, except for the Canadians, had no experience with such a concept. They were ruled by Sheikhs and dictators, kings and strongmen. Some of their leaders were compassionate and caring; others were not. But none of them bothered themselves with the peaceful transfer of power; in fact, there was no transfer of power at all.
“Miss,” one of the abaya-wearing, hijab-sporting Emirati women called, “just get a sheikh. It’s better.”
I laughed.
During break, Fadi called. “Are you okay, honey?” he asked.
“I’m heartbroken,” I replied. “It defies logic. I don’t think I can bear this,” I told him. Fadi listened patiently before commenting: “Honey, God has a plan. His Hand is part of
this. Trust in Him.”
“What about your immigrant visa, Fadi?” I asked trying to make his angst match mine. I
was desperate for it, in fact.
“Trust in His plan,” he said again.
160

Although I knew Fadi was probably right, I had seen too many signs to trust. At least at first. I feared the same gauges used to measure power in the Arabian Gulf would soon be used to measure power in my own beloved country. The thought seemed unbearable. More unbearable, in fact, than the blistering, boiling summer swelter of the Arabian desert.
161

It’s Your Turn, L-Zero-Zero-Seven
Within the folds of desert dunes, single family campfires looking like oversized sparklers popped up as Emirati families reconnected to their nomadic roots; they captivated me as I drove. Inspired me, really. Around the fires, mothers in black abayas and shaylas and fathers in white kanduras and head wraps sat with children who sported the same outfits in miniature. Sometimes I could see their faces; the men’s were flush with facial hair and a haughty disposition while black veils framed the women’s heavy-kohled dark brown eyes. They sat on blankets and large black and red and white patterned pillows and pegged white cloth tents to the desert floor. I watched as they ate and talked, but only when traffic was slow. At other times as I moved quickly past them, those who sat just above the side of the road at the entrance to the desert wilderness melded into a blur of black and white and golden-sparked flames.
“Why do they do it?” I once asked Fadi.
“They’re desert people,” my husband answered simply.
In the land of Arab and Bedouin nomads, there was a deep connection between ancestor
and descendant, a chord that connected past and present. It played itself out around those campfires under a dome thick with bright, scattered stars on a carpet of red-hued sands. On my long daily commutes from Dubai, I created stories of the modern-day nomads; it helped pass the time in the car. Such sentinels of the desert only occurred in winter, however, when the desert world was more inviting and less likely to kill.
During the rest of the year, as I traveled the long, lonely Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Road, there were only a few things that captured my attention. Heat shimmered on the asphalt road under a cloudless, brutally hot, washed-out blue sky. There were wandering camels, too, who bent their long necks to the desert floor searching for remnants of sagebrush-like sprouts.
162

From time to time, a few would wander onto the highway, and everything would stop. Everything. Camels are the lifeline of desert living; killing one—even one that wandered into traffic—would cost a large sum of money and, more importantly, the freedom of the driver. Still, with their easy-going, dude-like movements, I looked for them and their heavily lashed eyes; camel eyes spoke volumes. Spiraling sandstorms sprung up once in a while to cover the desert world in a dull reddish-russet hue reminiscent of old tintype photos; the gathering sand corkscrewed on the highway and lifted into the air, pinging off the windshield and blowing the car off its intended path. There were a multitude of stars, the occasional meteor shower, and billboards that featured smiling winners of the Abu Dhabi Islamic Bank’s (ADIB) biyearly 3,000,000 dirham giveaway. On long drives between Dubai and Ras al Khaimah, I began to see myself holding a 3,000,000 dirham check on one of the advertisements that dotted the side of the desert road. The first step to making my dream a reality would be to open a savings account. And so I did.
On the day I opened the account, the outside temperature hovered in the mid 120s. The water of the Arabian Gulf sent out a steamy stew of humidity, and the resulting haze hung heavy in the air. As I moved from the air conditioned car through the parking lot and into the mall —a distance of about 100 feet—sweat instantly shot from my pores, soaking me in a shower-like glisten. While I walked, I pulled my clothes from the sweat glue of my skin; I drew the creamy silk shirt away from my chest and back, and I shook the Aladdin-style pants free from my legs. When I entered the cold wall of air conditioning in the mall, I ran my hands through my hair shaking the strands loose that had matted to my neck. I pulled it all up into a ponytail, discreetly held my bra away from my wet skin for a few seconds, and finally made my way to the bank.
163

The Abu Dhabi Islamic Bank was a small cut-out on the second floor of the Al Hamra Mall across from the national mobile phone store—Etisalat—and next to a cheap clothing store run by the Russian mafia. It was not far from the colorful glass domed ceiling and spiraling inlaid glass tiled floors of the central court. But unlike the carefully manicured look of the rest of the mall, ADIB looked like every other bank in the UAE, undistinguished in its fake wood counters and glass enclosures. Still sweating profusely, I met first with the security guard.
“Ma’amsir?” he asked, using the bi-gender-meant-to-be-non-gender standard greeting. “A savings account, please.”
While I stood fanning myself with a red-covered iPad, he punched in my customer
service request and printed out a ticket. My tiny piece of arrow-shaped paper held the number L- 007. Positively James Bond-ish. A good sign, I tried to tell myself. L is for lucky, I thought, furthering the charade of hope. It was better not to get too deep into symbolism, however. Banking in the Emirates—or anything at all, really—was never efficient; instead, even the simplest matters were usually hours-long and multi-day endeavors. It would be foolish, then, to expect that opening a savings account would be any more efficient.
As I entered, the customer service representative and I made eye contact.
“Asalaam aluaikan (peace be with you),” I said, hoping my little bit of Arabic would be appreciated.
“Wa aluaikum salaam (and to you, peace),” he replied.
When I was a little girl, my parents—like most parents in our little town—opened a savings account for me at the local bank. Each Tuesday, I carried a little brown envelope to school that held a single dollar bill. I would hand it off to the teacher who, in turn, would hand
164

the envelope over to the bank. From there, I suppose, it was deposited with all the other single dollar bills of my early school life. Through this exercise, my parents hoped to teach me the value of saving. It did not work. The lesson never stuck. Maybe it was because that first savings account mysteriously disappeared, and because of that, the lesson I internalized was that years of saving dollar bills yielded no significant monetary return. When I began earning my own dollar bills as a young adult, I lived paycheck to paycheck; a savings account seemed so pointless. But in the UAE, it was necessary if I wanted my face and a 3,000,000 dirham check on a billboard on the side of the main road from Dubai to Ras al Khaimah.
Once inside Abu Dhabi Islamic Bank, I sat on a leather chair facing a golden nameplate at the customer service desk. I sounded out the Arabic letters of the representative’s name – Ali—as I shifted my weight on the leather chair—one cheek, then the other, first cheek again, then the other, rinse, repeat. The movement would help me avoid the Velcro-ripping sound and accompanying unlady-like ass-cheek print on the leather chair when Mr. Ali finally called me to his desk. I was still a sweaty mess—and would be for some time yet—because of the short walk from car to mall in the steamy hot soup of a late summer day.
Including the security guard, we were a little group of five in the bank that day. Mr. Ali sat directly in front of me while a woman in full black abaya and veil sat to my right behind a teller’s window. In a glass office behind me, a manager stamped papers. As I turned the small ticket round and round in my fingers, I waited for Mr. Ali, his thin head wrapped in a red and white checked scarf, to gesture for me to come.
165

Instead, he signaled the next customer by pushing a button at his desk. “Ding.” In a robotic voice, the number was read three times in Arabic and then translated into the corresponding English. Above Mr. Ali’s desk, the customer number shone in neon red.
“P. Sefre. Thilatha. Ithnan,” the robotic voice called out. “P. Sefre. Thilatha. Ithnan.”
“P. Sefre. Thilatha. Ithnan.”
And then:
“P. Zero. Three. Two.”
“P. Zero. Three. Two.”
“P. Zero. Three. Two.”
I looked at my number—L-007, looked back to the flashing red number, and for the first
time, noted the difference in letters. Mr. Ali looked around for the phantom P-032 customer, avoiding eye contact with me. Then he pushed the button again. Ding.
“P. Sefre. Thilatha. Thilatha.”
P-033 flashed on the board, and Mr. Ali waited the full allotted time before pushing the button again.
I tried to keep myself occupied while I waited. I calculated the number of body lengths that separated me and Mr. Ali, for example, and I found that if my head touched the chair and my feet stretched toward his desk, I would need 2 1⁄4 mes to get to Mr. Ali. While not a particularly essential calculation, it took up the full Arabic and English recitation of P-034. I picked up the newspaper, Gulf News, and scanned pictures; proud sheikhs and white-robed Emiratis smiled from the pages of all-Arabic writing. I organized the brochures on the table in front of me and, during the recitation of P-035, visualized the winning of the 3,000,000 dirham give-a-way by
166

redesigning the ADIB billboards. During P-036, I told the story of opening the savings account at an enormous imaginary press conference. “It took such a long time to open the account,” my imaginary winning self said, and we all imaginary laughed.
When I ran out of things to do, I turned to my L-007 ticket and noticed the tiniest letters under the large, black customer number: “42 customers in queue.” Forty-two customers? I flashed a pained look at Mr. Ali, holding up my ticket for him to see.
“Mr. Ali,” I groaned.
He shrugged, “what to do? Maybe they’re in the hallway. Insha’allah (God willing).” We both turned to look out into the mall. Although the security guard stood in the
doorway, no one else was there or in the mall hallway. No one. Not a soul.
“Ding. P. Sefre. Thilatha. Sahbah.”
Oh my God, I thought, the panic rising; I’ll be here forever. I pleaded with Mr. Ali,
“nobody’s here.”
Again, he shrugged. He had a job to do, and he would do it well. Properly. By the book.
Besides, going through the numbers would make it appear he had served forty-two customers in a relatively short time.
“Ding. P. Sefre. Thilatha. Thimania.”
My eyes begged for a reprieve, but Mr. Ali ignored me, carrying on according to the rules. I sat back frustrated, and a memory of another Emirati bank surfaced. When I considered my time with the National Bank of Abu Dhabi (NBAD), Mr. Ali and his button-pushing rigidity seemed the mark of efficiency.
“P. Zero. Three. Eight.”
167

During the first few days in the Emirates when everything was so new, a good-looking and better-smelling, completely unorganized Emirati man named Saeed led the new ex-pats around like sheep. Saeed was always in a hurry especially when he drove his little sports car and, although it was his job, it annoyed him that it took so long to get the new Western hires settled in. Rather than explaining or comforting the newcomers, he made appointments without our consent and shepherded us to them. Find an accommodation here, he said. Get your mobile phone there. Open a bank account here. When he took us to NBAD, we joined a long queue of ex-pats all waiting to open accounts.
I was jet-lagged, experiencing culture shock, and hot. Really hot. Hotter than I had ever been actually. If all these factors had not conspired to weaken my ability to analyze the situation, I might have noticed the acronym of the bank—NBAD—and understood it as a bad omen. Instead, on Saeed’s insistence, I opened an account by signing my name to a series of documents, none of which were filled in, none of which I could read. All of which were collected by the bank manager who promised that he would fill them in himself. “Don’t worry,” Saeed said, and I listened.
Over the next few weeks, I would open that account three more times; each time, the bank would misplace my signed, but not filled out forms. Each time, I had the strong sense that I should look for another bank, but after weeks of waiting for a bank account where a much- needed paycheck could be deposited, I did not want to begin the process all over again. My issues with NBAD only got worse. For over a year, I paid—literally and metaphorically—for not paying attention to my initial gut feeling.
“Ding. P. Sefre. Arbaht. Sefre.”
168

The flight from NBAD to my next bank, ADIB, began in the early Spring of my first year in the Emirates. Quite by accident, I realized that NBAD had been deducting a monthly payment from my account; it was the result of shopping around for a good car loan. At the advice of my then-friend-and-later-husband, Fadi, I asked the guys at his bank to provide me with a quote for a car. I would compare it with the one I had already received from my bank, NBAD.
Although I did not know it at the time, car loans in the Emirates were ruthlessly competitive. In a kind of semi-free agent status, loan agents—mostly underpaid foreigners, mostly on commission—began and, ultimately, closed the paperwork with little deference to the customer’s needs or desires. In my case, the quote from NBAD was activated as a loan without my consent. A signature on an application was all they needed to receive their commission and start the finance ball rolling.
However, I ultimately chose the loan from Fadi’s bank and purchased a little fire engine red Nissan Tiida. Against a sea of white cars (white is better in the desert sun), my little red car struck quite the dashing figure.
“Ding. P. Sefre. Arbaht. Wakhed.”
By the following March—seven months into my tenure in the Emirates, I noticed debits that I could not account for, so I promptly called the bank.
“There are debits for almost two thousand dirhams,” I explained. “They’re for your car loan,” the bank executive shot back
“My car loan? It’s with Dubai Islamic Bank,” I replied.
169

“It’s with NBAD,” he insisted “I have a loan with NBAD?” “Yes.”
“No, I don’t.”
“You do, miss.”
“Did NBAD give me money?” I asked to establish a logical argument.
“No, miss,” he answered honestly.
“Did the bank give money to Nissan for me?”
“No, miss.”
“Ok, then. No money, no loan.”
“You have a loan, miss.”
“You never gave me any money.”
“You’re right, miss.”
“So there’s no loan.”
“You have a loan, miss. For 1,850 dirhams each month.”
The conversation had moved to surreal land with a bank employee who, I assumed, had
never been to logical land. I tried one more time to steer the conversation back to something more rational.
“But you said you never gave me any money!” “That’s right, miss.”
“So there’s no loan.”
“You have a loan, miss.”
170

“Ding. P. Sefre. Arbaht. Ithnane.”
To solve the issue, I had to first agree with the premise that I had a loan. From NBAD. I conceded the point for efficiency. After another five months of payments and clearly tired of my daily complaints, NBAD took the extraordinary step to close the loan I did not have. They debited the entire amount of the car—did I say they never gave me any money?—leaving me a balance of negative fifty-two thousand dirham.
“Are you crazy? You debited the whole thing?”
“You wanted the loan closed,” the customer service agent told me coolly, clearly frustrated by my complaints.
“You never gave me money!”
“Ma’amsir,” he said slowly, patronizingly, “you have a loan for sixty-seven thousand. To close the loan, you must pay it off.”
“You already debited almost eighteen thousand dirhams. I’ve been paying back money you never lent me.”
“Right!” he said, growing more ill-tempered.
“Okay,” I tried in a controlled manner, “that means you owe me almost eighty-five thousand dirham, right?”
“Yes, exactly,” the agent said, excited that I had finally caught on.
For a few minutes, I was unnerved that I had, at some level, caught onto the logic of the whole illogical transaction. I worried that I was losing the ability to think rationally, but only until I asked the next question.
“So you’ll return the money to my account today?”
171

“My God, no!” the agent gasped; “we can’t settle for that much in one day.”
“There is no money! You never gave me any money!” I screamed. The only person who is owed money is me!”
“Ma’amsir, please, you asked for our help.”
Three weeks later, after I signed the loan closing documents for the loan I never received, the full amount was re-deposited back into my account. The next day I took my business to Abu Dhabi Islamic Bank.
“Ding. L. Sefre. Sefre. Sahbah.”
“L. Sefre. Sefre. Sahbah.”
“L. Sefre. Sefre. Sahbah.”
“L. Zero Zero. Seven,” the robot voice proclaimed in English.
The customer service number had become background noise as I slouched in the leather
chair miserable, despondent. No one had entered the bank. No one had left the bank. Not a single soul had gone to Mr. Ali’s desk. He had, however, pushed the console button on his desk forty- two times. Me, Mr. Ali, the security guard, and the woman-teller had been engaged in a comedy that had already lasted well over fifty minutes, and I had lost hope of ever being called to Mr. Ali’s desk. I would never win the 3,000,000 dirhams.
“L. Zero. Zero. Seven.”
“Miss,” Mr. Ali hissed. I was wasting his time, affecting the bank’s efficiency.
I looked at the neon red numbers. Checked the tiny piece of paper in my hand, sweat-
streaked and twisted, and walked finally to Mr. Ali’s desk. “Your number?” he asked.
172

“What?”
His request was absurd. I had shown him the number several times over the more than fifty minute wait.
“Your number,” he said, holding out his hand.
I handed it to him.
Less than five minutes later, I finished the paperwork for a savings account.
“Is there anything else I can help you with?” Mr. Ali asked, smiling pleasantly.
“No, thanks.”
“I hope you enjoyed your time at Abu Dhabi Islamic Bank today,” he added. There was
no sense of irony in his statement.
A few more years went by as did thousands of kilometers on the national road that ran
between the desert dunes. I saw the seasons of campfires, the crossings of camels, stars and meteor showers, sandstorms and the descendants of desert nomads. Although I continued my daily commute to and from Dubai, my face never graced the ADIB billboards that littered the desert landscape on the Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Road. Opening a savings account did not help me learn the value of money. In fact, it proved to be a waste, a fool’s errand. A few years after opening the account, I left the Emirates without ever winning the 3,000,000 dirhams. So much for a savings account. I did, however, log a lot of hours in my trendy apple red Nissan.
173

In the Cover of Dark
Since coming to the UAE, I have learned to love winter. I wait for it, ache for it as one might for a long-lost lover, and grieve for it as the shift to summer begins. This is quite a reversal for a gal from northeastern Pennsylvania, a place where snow and biting cold go hand-in-hand with the bleak unending gray of the brutal winter landscape. But in the UAE, the harshness of the seasons is reversed. Summer strikes at the very essence of survival with average temperatures of 130 degrees, and a sky void of clouds only acts to intensify the deadly rays by reflecting the too- hot desert sun. Winter, however, brings with it average temperatures of 75; everyone moves out doors to live and work and play under the sunny, bright blue skies. There is the occasional rain storm—usually one per year—but because of the rarity of rain in the region, that one storm is highly anticipated and celebrated as a gift from God.
“Al hamdulillah (thank God),” the locals say in response to rain, recognizing its cleansing property to both body and soul.
“Al hamdulillah,” the expats repeat, finding joy in what to them had always been normal, sometimes even a nuisance.
To celebrate the return to winter weather, I have moved my workouts from the NordicTrack inside to the almost cool mornings outside. The UAE is a different world in the deep darkness of the very early morning. Always a slower pace than that in the US, the cover of dark swallows up differences and mutes the constraints of time and convention. Women emerge with veils loose, not fastened. Strangers cross paths without noting each other; they do not have to abide by the bonds of neighborly behavior in the shadows, and in the inky blackness where nothing—not even a hand in front of a face—can be seen, imagination and inspiration combine into great storytelling. At least in the mind.
174

In the very early pre-dawn hours of winter, I wind my way from home to the boardwalk that hugs the saltmarsh to the open sea of the Arabian Gulf. And when I am finished, I do it again in reverse. Sometimes I run. More often I do a kind of run-walk-run. A little more than three miles, most of my route is shaded in absolute, complete darkness, especially now when the lights of my little development—still set for a summer dawn, not the onset of winter—click off long before the rising sun emerges.
It has been especially dark this week as the moon wanes from its high of barely a sliver to its low of nothingness; vague shadows mark the clutter of the everyday: benches and garbage cans, fences and light posts and garden gates. There is a long wooden table meticulously crafted in Bali and eight matching similarly crafted chairs set on the beach under a canvas canopy; when I make the turn from the salt marsh to the Gulf, its hulking darkness looms large on the course. Later, a covered grill sits sideways on the sand; its shape marks the almost end of the first part of my run. Because I know the path so well, I have no problem navigating the detritus of human existence, but I have noticed that the same cannot be said about my fellow early morning travelers.
Three days ago, just after beginning my morning run, a man appeared beside me with an old-fashioned, hand-held radio that quietly catalogued the news of the faraway English countryside. There was nothing that announced his sudden presence—not a footstep, not a hint of heavy breathing, not even the sound of the radio.
“Oof,” I gasped as his shape appeared next to me. While I had not been running particularly quickly, his sudden emergence tripped me up, slowed me down even more, and caused a rush of thoughts related to the safety of running in the deep dark black of the early, early morning.
175

A murderer, a stalker, a threat, my mind shouted.
He simply nodded, however, not breaking his stride, not smiling, not removing the radio from his ear. The hair on the back of my neck rose; gooseflesh rippled down and along my skin, but he simply moved on. When I turned back to check on his progress, the darkness had already consumed him. Not even a shadow remained.
The next morning, I was ready for him. I anticipated his approach though I could not remember exactly where I had met up with him the day before. When he appeared without warning, I slowed my breath and calmed my nerves. I was ready.
“Good morning,” I said, too bright and cheery for the time of day.
He nodded—same as the day before—and moved on past me without a word. When I turned, he had already morphed into the shadows.
Maybe he’s a ghost, I thought and began to create a story about the round-bellied man with the transistor radio.
Turning back to my route, a flash of light caught my eye and the story forming in my mind stopped abruptly. At the edge of the Gulf, I made out the shadow of a hoodie-wearing woman. She shone a flashlight into the water, whispering to someone I could not see. Her lost daughter, I thought, and a spirit story began to unwind itself in my overly active mind as I ran in the overly dark hours of the morning.
“Good morning,” I called to the woman.
She lifted herself slowly to standing, not answering my greeting, seemingly stunned by my ability to see her in such darkness. She was supposed to go unnoticed. Especially by me, I thought.
On the third morning, I tried, once more, for some type of acknowledgement.
176

“Good morning,” I said to the radio-carrying man.
He nodded.
“Lovely day, isn’t it?” I asked.
He moved on, quickly disappearing into the shadows even as I waited for an answer that
never came.
At the water’s edge, I met the hoodie-wearing woman.
“Good morning,” I said. “Weather’s changing.”
Like the day before, she stared, and as I moved on, her shadow merged into the early
morning dark. Grey had just begun to color the horizon; the sun, not yet visible, was beginning its daily ascent. The sound of the Gulf—the gentle movement of weak waves rolling in to shore and out again, the gliding and diving and crying of the green-plumed birds, and the blare of horns from cargo ships just beyond the horizon line—added to the claustrophobic crush of darkness. I looked back one more time hoping to catch another glimpse of the hoodied woman. Nothing. As I adjusted my gaze from behind me to the route in front of me, I barely missed colliding with a man dressed for work: dark pants, white shirt, thin tie, and thick black glasses, a character from a 1960s NASA movie.
“Sorry,” I said, noticing the outline of his buzz cut in the near blackout.
He passed without a word. Without ever noticing me.
When I circled back, a rosy haze outlined the mounds of desert sand on the horizon;
somewhere far away, the thinnest arc of sun appeared above the Gulf’s water. Birdsong increased, and schools of see-through, silver fish moved at the mercy of waves; occasionally one—an individual, I guess—jumped up and over and across her schoolmates. Shadows started
177

to appear in the first lights of a winter dawn—a beach chair, an umbrella, the black cylindrical grill of Turkish kabob-ers, the Bali built table under the canvas canopy.
As I neared the hoodied woman at the water’s edge, the sky over the saltmarsh went orange; the rosy-hazed outline faded to bluish-black. We locked eyes—the woman and me; she was surprised by my ability to see and nodded her appreciation, her acknowledgement. As the inky black drained and the sky grew increasingly bluer, she looked once more at me, nodded her head, and disappeared into the dying black of night.
The cover of darkness, the absence of moonlight, and the relative quiet of the human world had provided cover for the return of those whom I had already passed on the first leg of my run. At least for a little while. I would see them again the next day and the day after that, but as the moon began to reassert itself, I met with fewer and fewer figures in my early morning runs from my little home, along the saltmarsh where pink flamingoes stood one-legged in the suspended animation of night, to the sands of the Arabian Gulf on the shores of Mina al Arab, a little oasis where expats and Emiratis lived together.
In the emerging light of day, I took a long detour around the villa of an Emirati woman who breakfasted in the little flower garden at a small ornate wrought iron table. She would be waiting for me to pass, and she would pounce with her morning English.
“Good morning,” she’d say.
“Hello, Maitha,” I would reply.
And we would talk about all manner of things polite. She would practice her English, and
I would practice my Arabic. But we would not say anything really. Not today. I have embraced the lack of neighborly rules that reigned while I ran in the cover of dark.
178

Later, Maitha, I think. We will reestablish conventions when I reappear on the saltmarsh in the waning light of a late afternoon walk.
179

The Other Day I Found a Penny in the Street
Find a penny, pick it up
And all day long you’ll have good luck.
I love the mornings in the United Arab Emirates when the weather’s winter transformation begins and an almost cool breeze bathes our little community in hope. On these mornings, there is a promise of a long-desired liberation from the desert’s oppressive heat; in the quiet of the pre-dawn light, there is a wish-fulfilling whisper; better days ahead, it says. As the moon glitters on the Gulf, its twinkling, twirling, almost amorphous light snakes its way from bank to bank and back again, indulging a little before its banishment with the coming of the sun’s first rays. I wake early most mornings, mainly preparing for the long drive to Dubai, the UAE’s most famous city, but also to contemplate a life without my father, to grieve on my own at a time when others still dream.
While work is no more than an hour away—in kilometers, that is—traffic can make the commute much, much longer: two hours, three hours, even four. The earlier I leave my home, the less time the drive to Dubai will take. Minutes matter in this quest. And so I sacrifice the extra sleep and breakfast and the morning light to lessen my time in the car. After waking, I have a small window of time that allows for a quick shower and a few spare minutes to do my hair and add the necessary eyeliner, mascara, and blush to the fifty-year-old face in the mirror that, these days, I hardly recognize. There is no time to wait for a sleeping husband to wish me good morning; instead, I kiss him good-bye in the almost light of a new day.
While my mornings are all about hurrying to avoid long waits, I have a duty I cannot ignore. Regardless of traffic, I must look after Doodles, my half Shih Tzu, half Brussels Griffon. The little guy fully depends on me. So before I pack up my computer, throw yesterday’s dry
180

cleaning in the back of the car, and begin the long commute, Doodles and I take a walk. Every morning. Without fail.
During the late fall, as the days shorten and winter approaches, it is quite dark at 4:30 a.m. The lamplights in my community are still calibrated to summer timing, so they flicker off just as Doodles and I emerge from our little villa. Outside, darkness envelops us in the night’s last stand. Daylight does not begin its ascent for more than an hour when the fire-red sun sizzles its awake-ness, mirage-like, on the sweltering desert floor. Sunrises are brief here, the UAE being equatorial and all, but they are exceptionally stunning, animated and alive. Their brevity contrasts beautifully with the long, still darkness of night, especially in the winter months.
When I am not too wrapped up in my own head and I take whatever time is necessary to marvel at the daily sunrise, I find myself contemplating the almost spiritual role the sunrise might have in our lives—if only we noticed. I am convinced, you know, that the everyday-ness of the sunset is intentional, meant to be an all-too-obvious symbolic reference to the ups and downs of our lives. I don’t mean symbolic in the ultimate sense: the life and death sort. No. That would be too too-obviously symbolic. It would be so overdone, in fact, that the symbolism would be trivialized. The daily sunrise is symbolic because, in regards to the way we focus our lives, we often miss the short bursts of light, too busy focusing too intensely on the extended stretches of darkness.
Yet, it is a fundamental truth that light always follows dark with the regularity and consistency of the sunrise. While the simple daily reminder of the sunrise should be enough to cue us in to this obvious point, we often overlook it, ignore it, just plain forget to take notice of it. A sunrise, after all, is extraordinary in its ordinariness. Even with its undisputed beauty, a sunrise happens every day. Every. Single. Day. Its regularity produces the ultimate irony in its
181

symbolic power. Instead of the commonplace of a beautiful sunrise, then, we need a jolt to wake us up to the light, forcing us to acknowledge profound beauty in our lives, a profound beauty that always, always comes even after times of lingering darkness. Every once in a while, that jolt comes. By God, it comes.
“Hey, buddy,” I call, leash in hand. “Wanna go for a walk?”
There’s really no reason to ask. Doodles is always ready for a walk; he’d go anywhere. Especially with me. But there’s a comfortable symmetry in the routine of asking each morning, something that makes me happy, content. My asking this question might make us both happy, I suspect. So ask I do, preparing to head out into the shadows—into the darkness—of the too early morning. Darkness, I consider, is something I know a lot about these days, already forgetting my discussion of the symbolic nature of sunrises.
For a little more than two years, I have lived in the UAE in a little northern town called Ras al Khaimah. For a little more than two years, I have lived an altered life that was not altogether mine, but mine all the same. I had no choice, this move to the unknown, to an unfamiliar existence; I needed a job. I needed to care for my children, and I needed to prove to myself I was the strong, independent woman I had always been. For a little more than two years, I took what had become a Humpty-Dumpty-like broken life and put it back together again in a place where I no longer had to explain why. I simply worked on becoming whole. For a little more than two years, I have celebrated holidays and important family milestones without my family, most notably after the passing of my father, my best friend, my rock. So for a little less than two years, I have grieved for a father who died a little less than one year after I started my life anew in the UAE.
182

I am coping with my Middle East-sequestered grief, however, by recognizing the amazing coming together of so many disparate people, each contributing something unique to this new world of mine. I live in a little community of mostly expatriates, all nestled together in a sort of forced, yet agreeable, diversity on the edge of the Arabian Gulf. It is a pleasant place, the babble of our words adds to its charm, all of us searching for ways to understand and be understood. All of us polite to one other. None of us taking communication for granted as we might have done in our home countries. Our little community is picturesque, the sea and the sand marking its boundaries, so life looks idyllic too.
In the front of my house is the salt marsh, hazy in its humidity, the water view bursting with flocks of pink flamingos balancing on their stick-legs among herons and shrub brush. Past the salt marsh is a tiny strip of sand cut from the greater vastness of the Gulf Region desert. Here, waves of reddish-hued wind sculptures build into a still life, a portrait of rippling steps made from the dry and arid. An occasional camel lumbers into view, curiously out of place in this very small patch of wilderness; it and the great, lonely sands of the region are cleaved in two by the national highway.
To the rear of my home is the still, misty gulf and, just visible beyond it and to the right, is the open sea. On winter weekends, Doodles and I walk the sea on the spit of land between it and the edge of the salt marsh, paying our respects to the blinking reds of ships on the horizon, the tangle of coast-bound stingrays, the screech of native birds, and an occasional burkini-ed bather. But these walks occur on weekends, never in the early hours of working mornings.
“Let’s go, buddy.” I voice yet another of our morning rituals.
We take off down the street towards the community pool that sits within the lush greens of trees and bushes and tall, ornamental brown grasses with spikes of fluffy cotton; the pinks and
183

mauves and yellows of the many planted flowers fill the spaces in between. So unnatural for the desert, such vegetation is the result of a UAE obsession with abundance, one that comes with the commitment of the country’s most precious commodity—water. Throughout the length and depth of the desert greenery, workers install flexible, tubular water systems in and throughout the gardens, intestine-like in their right angle bendings back and forth. Workers converge on gardens to pick and prune, mow and nourish the colorful gifts, re-sculpting the desert from its more natural red-tan stereopticon image.
“Come on, Doodles; this way,” I urge as he obstinately heads down the center of the street.
Only ten pounds, Doodles can put up a fierce battle when he sets his mind to something. And on this dark morning, he refuses to walk anywhere but in the middle of the street. There are no cars. There are no people. There is no reason not to walk down the middle of the street. In fact, most of the little villas are still dark, their occupants finishing their dreams. It is just me and Doodles. But I tug at his leash to move him towards the sidewalk where trees and grasses provide a better solution to his daily needs. He refuses, obstinate and determined. After only a little, weakly fought fight, I relent. It is just too early for a battle. So we walk in the middle of the street.
There is stillness and silence in these morning walks. Even the birds’ whistle-cries as they fly and the crabs’ click click click on the stones by the salt marsh seem both more pronounced and more subdued, hidden in the blackness right before the dawn. The noise of daily life is all but absent. So it is a powerful few moments when Adhan—the call to prayer—emerges with its haunting, melodic chant. It comes out of nowhere, all at once, all around the city at the same time, from every minaret on every mosque in the skyline. You might expect Adhan to
184

break the silence, but that would be wrong. It would be too simplistic a description. Instead, Adhan seems to enhance the silence. It heightens it. It fills the air with reverence, adding a sense of beginning to an almost-ended evening. A long, awe-some Allah in all its rhythmic beauty begins each call, marking this end of darkness.
I close my eyes and breathe deep God’s presence in the form of the invocation, even as Doodles continues to clip clop clip clop down the middle of the street.
“Doodles,” I whisper, “what’s up with you today?” I laugh at the sassy swing of his behind. “Who are you trying to impress?”
I am quite sure I don’t speak out loud for the benefit of Doodles. Yet I do speak regularly; maybe it’s just another of our routines. Or maybe I speak out to hear my own voice, mingling it with the emerging morning’s song, a symphony of sorts in the sweetness of the almost morning air. The loud silence of the approaching day beats out the symphony’s percussion line. Adhan holds the melody. My voice adds yet another layer, a layer of ordinary sound in between the profound of the other two. My voice marks my presence within the greater world; it breaks through the lonely distance and connects me to my friends and family in other places. It calls out to my father somewhere far away, carried to him on the melody of the spiritual.
“Come on, Doodles. Come to the sidewalk.”
I pull at his leash, and he glances back at me. He keeps on walking. I laugh at his doggie insolence.
October 18th, I think, beginning to lose the serenity of the pre-dawn hours, beginning to catalogue and schedule the rest of my day. October 18th, I think again and stop mid-step to
185

recognize its importance to my life. Doodles notices and stops mid-street. He waits for me to unravel my thoughts.
“Happy birthday, Daddy,” I whisper.
This is the third time I have celebrated my father’s birthday since moving to the UAE. The first time I called home and heard his voice, laughed at his irreverent jokes, answered his questions about when I was coming home. The second time, a few months after his death, I sat at work and cried out my loneliness to no one but me. There was no reassuring voice on the other end of a phone call. No jokes. No father. Just a stinging, searing pain.
“I miss you, Daddy,” I call into the night, my statement punctuated by the end of Adhan. “I wish you could hear me.”
I make a move to push Doodles forward; I have lost the desire to walk. But he is immobile and inflexible, refusing to budge. “Stubborn,” I hiss at him in play. I tug again at his leash. Again, he doesn’t move.
My father’s birthday weighs heavily on my mind, and this mental weight manifests itself in a physical way, making my limbs and heart heavy and unyielding. Daddy, I hear over and over again in my mind. Ache radiates outward from the word through my body and into my limbs.
“Come on, Doodles; I have work,” I whine. The words carry the feelings of my father’s absence.
Now Doodles sits. Right in the middle of the street, the dog’s stubbornness and my sadness express themselves at a crossroads.
I stoop, trying to establish my own will in the matter, and I notice something on the ground glittering, shimmering, shifting my attention away from my dog. Abraham Lincoln’s coppery face looks up at me; a penny, it twinkles in the absolute darkness of the early morning.
186

The year of my father’s death, 2015, is emblazoned on the bottom of it. For a few moments, I try to account for such a find, and the urgency to move collapses into bewilderment. Doodles, however, makes the decision that it’s time to go. To the sidewalk. Off the street. To trees and grass and flowers.
I bring the penny close, trying to take in details. Doodles and I walk on through the garden, through the predawn darkness. It defies logic, I think to myself, turning the penny over and over again in my hand. I am the only American in this development. There are Jordanians and Palestinians like my husband, Egyptians, Emiratis, and Lebanese. There are British and Irish and the occasional Canadian. There are Indians and Pakistanis and a mishmash of others from so many other places. But there is only one American. Me. I have found a penny in the middle of a little development that sits on the southern side of Ras al Khaimah, a town that sits in the Northern part of the United Arab Emirates which, itself, stands in the gulf region of the Middle East, far, far away from the United States. Nine time zones away actually. And far away from any place that accepts payment in American currency. Daddy, I think again, this time more in wonderment than in loneliness.
Doodles and I turn back towards home. His need to be sassy and stubborn is gone, and he is instead compliant, happy, satisfied with his role in our walk. Off in the far distance, the sun is beginning to show itself, darkness doggedly giving away to an inky bluish gray on the horizon. The first rays of daylight cast themselves out over the desert dunes that sit behind the salt marsh on the opposite side of the street from my home. Lights are beginning to blink on in the villas as we make our way, and enough time has elapsed since Adhan that prayer has begun, filling the air from the surrounding mosques with the name of God. Allah, I hear again and again. I walk home
187

satisfied, aware of the gift that I have been given, the gift that moved me from darkness to light, from broken to whole, from far away to home again.
I have heard you, dad. Happy birthday.
188

Marigold Offerings in Gold Bowls
Once I moved to the UAE, traveling became less of a luxury and more of a rule. Dubai was the hub of travel in the Middle East, and it was easy and relatively cheap to travel to the countries of East Africa and to India, to Asia and Europe. So, I traveled to the stupas of Kathmandu, the pyramids of Cairo, and the palace of the Dalai Lama. In Istanbul, I walked in the footsteps of Roman emperors and Ottoman rulers; in Jordan, those same feet were washed in the river where Jesus had been baptized. I have hunted lions with binoculars on the sweeping savanna of Nairobi, felt the long arm of history at Athens’ acropolis, strolled the grounds of Versailles, watched the sun come up over Prague, and had a Guinness (or two) in the pubs of Dublin. While all those places were of some interest to some of my friends, none received as much hopeful attention as India.
“Do you feel more spiritual?” my friends asked on the night I arrived.
“I just got here,” I answered.
To my friends, India was the archetype of exotic, the land of yogis and Om, of karma and
Namaste. India promised spiritual rebirth or spiritual awakening or spiritual understanding. Spiritual something, at the very least. So they were summarily disappointed when, after a day or two, I had not changed in any fundamental way: no ability to tie my body up into pretzel-like shapes, no levitating while in meditation, no achieving nirvana in a Hindu temple. In fact, I was actually thrown out of one temple for not being a practitioner; that event was a kind of anti- spiritual growth, I suppose.
“Don’t you feel spiritual?” one friend asked. “Well, yeah,” I responded.
“I mean more than usual,” she said.
189

“Because it’s in the air or something?”
“Yeah. Something like that,” she replied.
“Actually, it’s normal,” I said. “Different,” I tried to explain, “but completely the same,
too.”
In India, I met the wealthy. And the poor. I met a father who looked for answers for his
special needs son and a university professor who thought he had the answers. I saw street vendors who created complex strings of marigolds in front of beautifully colored, intricately carved temples. Strange spices and sweet-smelling incense fought each other for dominance., and roadways packed with cars made way for whole families on motorbikes who weaved in and out of traffic, a breath away from the passengers inside the cars.
Yet, while things on the surface were definitely different, life itself had a familiar rhythm. It was predictable, in fact, as people rushed to and from work, shopped for groceries, waited on corners to cross streets, talked on mobiles, chased their children, kissed in alleyways, prayed. On the first morning as I prepared to meditate, my Indian companion objected.
“No time for meditating,” she said.
“What?” I asked in disbelief.
“We must off to the ATM,” she pushed, “before the queue.”
At the time of my visit, money was scarce; larger notes had been pulled from circulation
and strict daily limits were mandated. An hour after heading out for the ATM, long lines appeared that stretched down the block, turned the corner, and stretched out some more. A lot more. In a country of almost 1.4 billion people, I learned why beating the queue was more of a concern than meditating. Still, there was a spirituality that hung in the air of India if only you could slow down enough to notice it.
190

One morning, I left the hotel in my best outfit, feeling adventurous.
“Good morning,” I smiled at the doormen outside the hotel.
“Madam,” they answered.
As I walked down the driveway, one of the men called out, “Madam, can we take you?” “No. No,” I waved them off; “I’m going for a walk.”
“But . . .” he motioned to the gray clouds in the sky.
“No worries,” I said, not stopping to consider the caution.
A few minutes later, the skies opened up without warning and with a ferocity I had
neither prepared for nor expected. The rain came hard, and it hurt. Actually hurt. No more than ten minutes after leaving, I returned to the hotel, my wet clothes clinging to me.
“Monsoon season,” one porter gestured to the rain, laughing.
“Obviously,” I replied.
“Madam,” he offered, “today is a good day for new plans. You’ve received a sign.” “Should I meditate, maybe?” I asked.
“Meditation is always a very excellent choice,” one porter—Homer was his name—
replied.
“Gives the soul a very refreshing,” another clarified.
“Like a good rain,” the third added.
“Then meditation it is,” I said, moving inside the hotel.
As I walked through the sliding glass doors, the three porters continued to discuss the
importance of meditation on the soul. On one side of the lobby, I noticed the statues of elephant- headed Ganesh and blue-skinned Krishna. On the other side, sat Buddha; fat and smiling, of course. Incense spilled out of individual rooms and into the hallways; strings of marigold
191

offerings in gold bowls rested on pedestals along the way. I felt different. Spiritual, maybe. Definitely hopeful that I had found a spiritual renaissance. Maybe the rain had baptized me, I thought. I closed the door to my room to meditate. Maybe, I thought, I’ll be able to tell my friends something new tonight.
192

Women of the Desert
Behind the high walls of the family compound, several generations of women—mothers and daughters, sisters and aunties and nieces—gathered to cook over an open fire. Not far from the wavy red dunes of the desert, the sun began its hurried descent into the Arabian Gulf, covering the desert sand with a glimmering gold glow. The mournful, throaty cawing of black and white fanned-tailed birds dipped in an out of the pink-tinged sky; lit charcoal, its acrid smell, rose and fell in alliance with the shifting outdoor light. I fell onto one of the purple silk and beaded Aladdin-like pillows and listened to the women tell their stories.
“You are not alone,” Aliyah said when trays of meats were laid at our feet. “Your sisters,” she said, gesturing to her large extended family.
They were not empty words. What Emirati wives and mothers and sisters say, they mean, especially in the company of other women. They do not waste time with half-truths and words meant to save feelings. They had accepted me, a woman from another culture, another world, and there was no formality, no recognition of difference, only togetherness.
“Shukran (thank you),” I whispered.
I had only recently returned from the US, the second trip home in as many months. The first was to celebrate Christmas with my mother; the second was to publicly celebrate her life with family and friends and our little town neighbors. My mother—who had slipped further and further into Alzheimer’s—had finally succumbed to a whole host of age- and disease-related issues. As I sat in the courtyard with the women, I mourned the emptiness of my life without my mother. I lamented the long days of never again feeling her fingers comb through my hair or hearing her comfort on the other end of a phone call. On the evening I sat with the women of the
193

desert, I felt the fear of a little girl facing life without her mom, a little girl in the body of a grown woman.
“Insha’allah (God willing), Allah will care for your mother,” Aliyah declared. “We are here,” a niece added.
“I’ve wondered,” I said, “why God brought me here. Now,” I said, nodding to the women around me, “I know why.”
“You are welcome,” Aliyah told me.
“Wa’allah (I swear to God), you are welcome,” another sister affirmed.
“You see, miss,” Aliyah began, “we understand.” They too mourned the loss of a mother,
a grandmother, an aunt, a sister.
The women stood and moved towards me without words and, one-by-one, touched me.
On my shoulder. On my back. They cupped my face in their hands, kissed my cheeks, clasped my hands between theirs. Their gestures connected us in our pain, linking us together as a new kind of family. As sisters.
“Al hamdulillah (thank God),” I sighed.
The women laughed at my Arabic, but echoed it, too, as an affirmation of their sincerity:
“Al hamdulillah.”
Allah. The minarets all across the city, perfectly timed, perfectly in tune, began their long
sonorous call to prayer by invoking the name of God. The late timing of the nightly prayer in the lengthening daylight marked a gradual return to the brutal heat of the desert and to its sand that spiraled and spun and obscured everything in its path. Even the Hajjar Mountains that ringed the city wore a veil of simmering heat and swirling sand throughout the summer months. Over the compound walls, lonely one-humped camels, heads on long necks angled to meet the desert sage,
194

stored winter’s food for summer’s shortage. Their footsteps, first obscured by the shifting sands, and then blown by the late winter wind, dissolved into dunes. To the left, the Gulf, shimmered under the weight of the setting sun, an explosion of red hovering just above and projecting itself onto the salty waters while a family of wild donkeys, braying, butted into the brick barricade around the family’s home. The crackling of the courtyard fire and the smell of the almost-burnt beans in the bottoms of bronze pots of Turkish coffee kept me in the moment. With the women of the desert.
“Allah chose your mother’s time,” a niece said.
“Still, we must live,” Aliyah sighed.
“Insha’allah (God willing),” a sister added.
“Insha’allah,” I repeated and felt the rawness of my mother’s too-recent death.
I met Aliyah when everything was new: culture, language, people, the desert. I was confused, disillusioned, homesick, hot. Hotter than I had ever been, in fact. And covered— always covered—in a thin layer of sand. I had been in the Emirates for less than a week and had not yet found a place to live. I was running out of time. And money. While I considered running away, returning home, I did not want to admit defeat. To me. Or to my family.
So when living day-to-day did not calm the circling, swirling eddy of thoughts in my mind, I began to break my survival into hours. I needed to succeed at something, anything. Learn to say hello in Arabic. Take on a traffic circle in Dubai. Find a friend. Buy a bed. As the hours piled up, so too did the days, and life began to take on a semblance of routine in a world of differences.
195

Although she was fully enveloped in the black abaya and shayla of her culture and religion, Aliyah defied every stereotype I had carried with me from the US. She was strong and stubborn and had a penchant for fighting; in fact, she fought all the time. Every. Single. Fight. Mostly for the underdog. Often against men. And while I admired her grit, I learned quickly she was not a particularly smart fighter. Instead, she was scrappy, reckless, a little self-righteous, and, because of this, she made enemies. Mostly men. But some women, too.
Aliyah looked at me through eyes that warned. Almost completely draped in a fine black cloth, her kohl-lined, deep brown eyes stood out, and I took their warning seriously. This is my country, they said.
When I had had enough of Aliyah’s obvious disdain, I confronted her where she and the other Emirati women were having lunch.
“I know you don’t like me,” I began.
The women—initially startled by my intrusion—quickly righted themselves.
“Not true,” one woman said.
“She likes you,” another added.
“I don’t trust you,” Aliyah smiled.
“What?”
“Sit down,” Aliyah instructed, and I did.
The women carved up their lunches for me—a little bit of this; a little bit of that—and
placed it in front of me.
“Eat,” the women advised.
“Westerners come, take our jobs and run away with money.”
196

It was true. For years, Emirati banks, flush with oil money, had been loaning high sums to foreigners. Take up to twenty times your salary, promotions read. Most took loans as a way to save; otherwise, they would spend it in the high-end glitz of Dubai. Most paid back their debts, but some foreigners—too many—had been known to make off with a million dirhams or more, leaving the banks in the lurch. When the administrator before me ran away, he not only took money, but also every key to every door in the school, just for good measure. Another Westerner. Another scandal. In the interim, Aliyah kept the school running. Until I came.
“Westerners never stay,” Aliyah’s cousin told me. “I have nowhere to go,” I said.
“You let Hassan do bad things,” Aliyah alleged. But I had my own Hassan story to tell.
Hassan, the Emirati Vice Principal, whose office sat next to mine, was a short-fused- alpha-male misogynist wrapped in a white kandura and headscarf. Early on, he decided I needed a husband as a way of controlling my independent streak; a husband would make me more traditional, less irrational. Or so he thought. “And women,” Hassan disclosed, “want to be a man’s queen.”
After a few weeks, Hassan decided the quickest way to marry me off was to marry me himself although he already had three—mostly unhappy—wives.
"Miss Jackleen," Hassan said; "Emirati men will steal your money."
"I don't have any, Hassan."
"Miss Jackleen, I have too much money,” he said as he pulled out his wallet, bursting
with dirham. "Three new sisters, Miss Jackleen,” Hassan winked. "Yes?”
When I ignored his inglorious proposal, acting dumb instead of jumping at the chance,
197

my professional relationship with Hassan fizzled. How dare she? he must have thought, a not- very-young woman. And from that moment, Hassan smiled to my face, but worked behind my back to bring about my demise.
When I finished the story, Aliyah moved towards me; instinctively, I pulled back. Undaunted, she reached out and kissed me. Right cheek. Left cheek. Right again.
“He doesn’t like me either,” I said weakly, not sure how to respond.
Over the next few months, Aliyah and I developed a mutual respect for each other. She offered advice for adapting to the new culture, and once, I returned the favor after having heard her fight with Hassan. I crossed the grounds of the school to Aliyah’s office in a sandstorm, a scarf wrapped around my face to protect me from the assault of sand and wind. Trees bent and snapped in a background the color of stereopticon images.
“Aliyah,” I knocked. “I heard you with Hassan today.”
Aliyah burst into laughter, “Very angry. Right?”
“Aliyah, he has power.”
She waved her hand to dismiss the warning, “My brother is a diplomat. High up.” “But he was leaving you alone.”
Aliyah rejected the recent détente as suspicious.
“There’s a saying,” I began, fishing for another tactic; “let sleeping dogs lie.” “Americans like dogs. More than babies,” Aliyah interrupted.
In view of the way most Emirati’s viewed dogs, I was worried that she may have missed
the point, so I launched into an explanation of the idiom.
“I understand, miss,” Aliyah affirmed.
When I left her office and headed out into the storm, I exhaled a That went well.
198

Later that day, Aliyah stepped into Hassan’s office. My door was open, so I could hear everything. Aliyah seemed pleasant enough as she recounted a discussion with a parent. But, as she turned to leave, she announced that Americans had an interesting saying. The tone of her voice changed; Hassan sensed a battle, and I felt his eyes burn through the office wall we shared.
“Sleeping dogs must lie,” Aliyah said triumphantly.
Okay, I thought, she’s offering him an olive branch.
“Say what you mean!” Hassan barked.
“It means you are a dog. A lying dog. You are a dog that lies,” she spit. Oh shit.
“You’re calling me a dog?
“Yes. If you spoke American, you would understand,” Aliyah said.
“Get out!” Hassan screamed.
Aliyah strutted past my door with a toothy grin and winked. That afternoon, my already
non-relationship with Hassan tanked, but the Emirati women began showing up with family pictures and hot tea. Afterwards, Aliyah and I maintained a polite friendship. She called; I visited with her and her sisters. I took presents; she gossiped. We were friendly, but not really friends. And that is where our relationship might have remained except for the death of my mother.
“You are not alone,” Aliyah said as she welcomed me one dusky winter evening as green- and white-crowned birds swooped and swerved from ground to sky and back again. Between the tall minarets, I could hear the chants of men in prayer and saw them bow in submission. In the courtyard, I joined several generations of women—mothers and daughters, sisters and aunties and nieces—to cook over an open fire not far from the wavy red dunes of the
199

desert and the fleeting footsteps of solitary camels. I watched the sun dip over the sand and disappear into the Gulf and smelled the acrid smoke of burning charcoal. It was on this night I was welcomed as a woman of the desert.
200

 The Journey of a Thousand Miles Begins with One Step
I lived in the northern part of the UAE less than an hour, as the bird flies, from the country’s most famous city. The modern national highway between my home in Ras al Khaimah and my job in Dubai cut a swath through the vast loneliness of the desert, where only the wild camels and the occasional Bedouin roamed through the ever-shifting waves of sand. Most of the drive was easy, but on the way, there was a bottleneck of approximately six miles or nine kilometers. On a bad day, the route between home and work could take up to three hours because of it. Some nights as I drove home, my husband would call to check on my progress.
“Where are you?” he would ask.
“I can just see the new masjid (mosque),” I’d reply.
We would talk a bit about our days, filling each other in on the moments we spent apart
from each other. He would tell a joke, and I would laugh. “Don’t make me worry,” he would say before hanging up. After an hour or two, he would call again.
“Where’re you now?”
“I am almost at the new masjid,” I’d say.
Since I generally left home in the early pre-dawn hours, I began my daily travels by
waiting for and, then, watching the rising of the sun over the desert sands. It was a glorious few moments as the rays of the sun reddened the already golden-red sands of the desert north. Like a fireball, it sat a few moments on the desert floor before moving quickly into the sky. If I were lucky, a full moon sat patiently, watching the spectacle before retreating into the brightening day. The sunrise took up, at most, fifteen minutes of my drive. News programs and books on tape and phone calls to friends and family took up the rest.
201

One morning, in the six-mile quagmire, five lanes of traffic lined up bumper-to-bumper, brake lights blinking on and off, on and off, on and off. I sat in the far lane, listening to the Tao Te Ching, an ancient Chinese book of philosophy. My blood pressure was up; the words of the spiritual master, Lao Tzu, were supposed to bring it down. It had not worked. Although the book had the perfect advice—simplicity, patience, compassion—another day of heavy, slow traffic had blocked my openness to it.
In the rearview mirror, I saw a red car to my right trying to squeeze into the no-space between my bumper and the fender of the white car directly behind me. As I watched the scene playing out, the Tao became nothing more than background noise.
“What’s he doing?” I asked out loud, watching the red car’s performance.
As it plowed into the less-than-a-meter space behind me, the white car was forced out of the lane and onto the service road.
“You won’t believe this,” I said, as my husband answered my phone call.
“What’s wrong?” he asked.
I explained what I had seen.
Can you remain unmoving until the right action arises by itself? I heard distantly. It was
the Tao continuing to play on in the background.
“Can you film it?” my husband asked. “Just in case.”
“Too risky,” I replied. “Now the white car is pushing back in,” I explained, offering him
a play-by-play of the scene.
“I’m sorry, honey,” Fadi replied before hanging up; “I have to teach. Please be careful.
Don’t make me worry about you.”
202

Despite no longer having an audience, I kept my eye on the drama going on behind me. The two cars changed lanes several more times. Red car. Then white car. Then red car again. I was witnessing a battle of wills between two two-ton machines.
Peace and quiet are preferred. Victory should not be praised, the Tao droned on. I heard it, but just barely.
The driver of the red car, now in the lane to the right, turned his wheels as if he were going to, once again, break into the no-space behind me.
He’s crazy, I thought and leaned down to turn off the Tao Te Ching. Before I could, however, traffic began to move in front of me, and I picked up speed. Rather than move into the now-open space, however, the red car revved its engine and plowed into the side of the white car. A direct hit. On purpose. Traffic screeched to a halt as debris from the cars spread across the lanes behind me.
Knowing when to stop, you can avoid any danger, I heard in the background as I continued to watch the fallout behind me.
The Tao’s words had unconsciously permeated my whole being, and as the meaning took hold, I looked up to see that traffic had stopped in front of me. I slammed on the breaks. Just in time. My legs shook uncontrollably at the near-miss, and my focus shifted from my rearview mirror to the front window. Lao Tzu’s words had saved me.
While some may say the Tao’s words were a coincidence at best, I heard them as a warning that helped me avoid an almost-unavoidable accident. For this, I was profoundly grateful to the Divine. And, I suppose, to Lao Tzu, too.
A good traveler has no fixed plans and is not intent on arriving. I hear you, Lao Tzu. I have learned my lesson well.
   203

Transformation on the Nile River
Less than a week after visiting Istanbul, I was having dinner in a Moroccan restaurant on the Nile. Close to where I dined, the Great Pyramid sat in her ancient majesty and waited for my visit. While neon-lit boats of sightseers cruised past the semi open-aired restaurant, three musicians in red fezzes and striped brown caftans played Arabic music. The zither set the exotic melody; the hanging Moroccan lanterns, tied back curtains, and large floor-worthy cushions set the mood. I was alone; Collin would join me the next day.
When the throaty baritone of Adhan—the Muslim call to prayer—pierced the early evening ebb and flow, the musicians laid down their instruments for a more profound melody. I breathed in the long, dulcet tones of God’s name from the minarets all around Cairo. Allah unwound itself on the ancient river’s breezes, and I joined in with my own offering of thanks. Together with the name of God, it soared and faded and soared again on the whim of the wind of the great Nile. The beating heart of Egypt.
As I contemplated the moment in which I found myself, I considered the nexus between past and present. Mine. And Egypt’s. As antiquity clashed with the contemporary in the land once ruled by pharaohs, I looked out across the Nile to the fast-darkening purple threatening to overtake the star-filled sky of an almost night. The lights of river boats and restaurants and passers-by were reflected in the ancient river and sparkled in snaky lines across the water in a upward-looking display for the stars.
It was hard to fathom my own story in relation to where I sat on that last night of March; my own personal nexus of past and present was only just becoming clear to me. Where I was. And where I had been. Being on the banks of the primal river laid it all out in front of me. More than four years earlier, I had returned from winter break to the little school in Pennsylvania
204

where I worked. After a day of teaching and putting out fires, my boss asked me to meet with him. He asked about the most pressing issues in the school building; surprised, but comforted in his new-found interest, I laid out both the issues and the actions needed to solve them. He took copious notes. When I finished, he looked up over his cheaters, put down his pen and paper, and uncoiled a malicious smirk.
“As of now, your job is terminated,” he said.
“What?” I asked.
“Get out!” he demanded, pointing to the door of his office, but meaning the school. In the seconds between his words and my next actions, I searched my memory for
meaning. I had only recently received acclaim from an independent team of evaluators who had spent the better part of a week combing through the school’s work and records. Their commendations of my efforts were both in writing and in a speech where the community was informed in a very public wrap-up. The man who had just fired me, however, did not fare as well. In fact, the evaluators’ report called him out as a bully, as one who created a culture of fear and intimidation. He was humiliated. And I would pay for it.
“You think I told the team about you, don’t you?” I asked.
“I don’t care!” he answered coldly, but it was clear I had hit his soft spot.
“The irony is it wasn’t me. I didn’t say a word.”
He was unmoved by my truthful argument, and I left his office, dejected and confused,
but defiant in the knowledge I had done nothing wrong. It would take a long time to recover, of course, but when I felt better about my professional prospects, I took a job in the Middle East. I told myself that in the land of the ancient prophets and messengers, I would heal. Because no one knew me in this faraway place, I had the chance to rebuild my life through hard work and travel.
205

It was there, then, that I integrated my already well-established notions of the West with a list of new expectations from the East. I learned a new culture, parts of a new language, and saw myself through new eyes. I fell in love. I began to build a bridge between the past and my new present. Traveling was one of the ways I did this; it provided a visceral reminder of the constant change that affected all things: cultures, countries, continents. In comparison, the changes in my own life seemed so much smaller.
So as I sat looking out at the longest river in the world, I considered the path my life had taken to bring me to the exact moment on the mighty Nile. While I sat in Cairo, I had arrived at acceptance. Of others. And of myself. A greater force propels us, the winding river whispered. Let it be. Like the Nile, I moved in a turning, twisting, confusing way. My path was not straight. In some places, I was battered and beaten. Where there were barriers, I learned to move around some and bounced and bounded and jumped around others. But, ultimately, I had arrived exactly where I was supposed to be. Like water, the person I had become recognized the fluidity of life. Movement. Change. Transformation. They were the only constants.
“Madam,” the waiter interrupted my thoughts; “how do you like the view?”
I could not think of a thing to say that would do justice; I was filled with emotion and teetering on the edge of allowing it to flow. When the waiter saw the tears harbored in my eyes, he smiled his understanding and felt no embarrassment. He continued to engage.
“The Nile,” he said turning away to look towards the river. “It is life.”
While it was the first time I had hear it said, it would be a recurring theme throughout my stay in Egypt. The Nile is life. I considered the inherent symbolism and its implications to my own life, and I considered a very-recent trip to Istanbul and its mythical Orient Express. Both landmarks reflected epic journeys, great changes, movement, and ultimately transformation. For
206

a moment as I considered my own epic journey, I was grateful that on a fateful day in January when the snow on the ground grayed with the dirt of footprints and the exhaust of car engines, the Divine saw fit to relieve me of my old life, my old ways. I saw the man who fired me through new eyes; he was a conduit of the change I needed to become the person I was supposed to be. The woman who on the last night of March sat looking dreamily out at the Nile River. The world—and my life—needed some shaking up; it needed to be opened up. And it was. So on that night in the ancient lands of the pharaohs, I felt oddly at home in the world.
“I am lucky,” I whispered.
“We are lucky to have you,” the waiter responded with a kind smile.
I appreciated his small, gratuitous compliment. While it was born of the waiter’s
misunderstanding regarding the intended recipient of my whisper, I knew it as a response to the prayer I had whispered to the winds of the Nile, the one that mingled and merged with the resonant Allah of Adhan.
“Thank you,” I said out loud after the waiter left my table. It was a sign of appreciation to whomever saw fit to deliver me exactly where I needed to be at exactly the right moment. On that particular night, it happened to be in an almost open-aired Moroccan restaurant on the Nile River, just outside Giza less than a week after visiting Istanbul and before returning to my new home in Ras al Khaimah.
207

We Will Meet Again, My Daughter
Almost exactly two years after I had lost my father and a few months after my mother was laid to rest, my son and I wandered through Egypt. While I recognized my good fortune at being able to satisfy a life-long dream to see the ancient wonders of the Egyptian pharaohs, I was struggling to redefine my place in the world, alone without my parents. Collin had left the UAE earlier in the year for France where he attended the American University in Paris. His spring break coordinated with mine.
“Let’s go somewhere, mom,” he said.
“Where to?”
“Egypt,” he decided.
For years, we had read the books, studied the history, saw the movies, marveled at the
architecture, the tomb paintings, the immense emptied sarcophagi, King Tut. All from a distance, of course. Yet, we knew them so well that as we arrived in Cairo, we were worried the monuments would not measure up, maybe even disappoint. We were wrong. Very wrong.
On our first morning in Cairo, we traveled to the pyramids of Giza. Of course, we did. Everyone who came to Egypt made the pyramids their first stop. Or should. After a few moments in the car, I pulled out my laptop and began to write. I had a blog post due and used the down time to get it started. Almost thirty minutes later, my son bumped my arm.
“Mom,” he gasped.
“Hold on,” I said continuing to write.
“Mom,” Collin said again.
I looked at him. He was looking out the car window, so I readjusted my gaze to line up
with his. There, looming massive on the horizon, the Great Pyramid came into view.
208

Since making my home in the Middle East, I had traveled to a lot of places—Nepal, Jordan, Turkey, Russia, Kenya—and I had seen a lot of amazing things—the sunrise over Mt. Everest, the rock-face entrance to Petra, the Hagia Sofia, the Parthenon, the Palace of Versailles. I had seen the high-kicking folk dances of the Caucasus Mountains and the whirling dervishes of the Middle East. I had been lowered from the parapet of an old castle to kiss the Blarney Stone and hiked the fjords of Norway. But I had never seen anything as glorious, as unexpected, as monumental as the Great Pyramid.
“Some Westerners put their forehead and hands against the walls,” our guide said as we entered the base of the Great Pyramid.
“Why?” I asked.
“They gather energy from the pyramids, they say. Like they’re talking directly to Allah,” Mohammed laughed.
“Like prayer?” I asked, gauging Mohammed’s openness to my openness. “Do you think it’s prayer?” Mohammad asked a question in response. “Everything is possible, Mohammad,” I laughed; “until it’s not.”
“Like talking to Allah?” he asked.
“They certainly make me think about God,” I said motioning to the pyramids. “Just thinking about Him would be a prayer, right?”
Rather than answering, Mohammed went quiet, thinking through the various threads of our conversation. Yet throughout the day, as we toured the sights around Giza, Mohammed returned to the topic of energy, the pyramids, prayer, Allah. He was intrigued, and though his questioning, he was helping me focus my thoughts on the majesty of the magnificent structures all around me. I felt small in comparison to their might, and this physical sense of smallness kept
209

bringing me back to the aloneness I felt since my parents’ deaths. The world felt much bigger since they had passed, and my place in it felt unsteady, unsure.
“Do we need to be reminded of Allah’s greatness?” Mohammad asked after a long break in our conversation.
“I’m not sure. Probably not everybody, but some,” I said. “For me, seeing them,” I nodded at the pyramids, “gives me a feeling of enormity right here,” I said, thumping my chest with my fist.
“Of course,” he answered. “That’s Allah.”
“Maybe that’s the point. To feel the enormity and then to remember.
“Al Hamdulillah (Thank God),” Mohammad replied.
The next day at the Valley of the Kings, Collin and I baked in the midday sun of the dry
mountainous landscape only a few miles from the famed Nile River. Despite the heat, we stood in the underground tombs, suffocating from the lack of ventilation and too many tourists. Dust coated the inside of our noses, our throats; it had a smell I have been unable to describe. It is a smell I will not forget, however. As we stared at the hieroglyphics, the figures seemed to stare back at us. They were alive, absolutely breathtaking. The colors on the wall had maintained their beauty, their brilliance despite the many, many long years since they were first added to the rock- hewn walls. Thousands of years of color.
“There’s a message in these walls, Collin,” I said.
“That’s the point,” he responded dryly.
“No, I mean a bigger message than the obvious one,” I snarked back.
Since Collin would not commit to the conversation that was brewing inside my mind, I
thought back to the conversation I had had with Mohammed only the day before.
210

“When we look at the pyramids,” Mohammed waved his hand across the plateau, “it’s like a prayer, one we don’t have to say, just feel.”
A prayer we feel, I considered again as I looked for the bigger message in the painted walls of the pharaonic kings. I began to understand what I could not explain.
“Al Hamdulillah,” I whispered in thanks to Mohammad’s thoughts.
I had not been able to put the brilliant bursts of color, the age, the smell, the scale of the engineering feats in front of me into words, but I no longer needed to. Instead, I felt their significance. I almost, but not quite understood what I needed to understand, and it seemed to lighten the feeling of loss, at least for a little bit.
Before heading off to Luxor, my son and I chose a tour that took us to Memphis, the once grand capitol of the ancient Pharaohs, now a tiny hole-in-the-wall town with a single dusty street and towering palms. Memphis still held surprises, however, one that would help me deal with my new reality.
Under the gigantic shadow of the great Ramses II colossus, an older man introduced himself to us as the ancient king’s direct relation. As proof, the 70+-year-old man, wizened and browned from his time in the too-hot sun of the Egyptian desert, offered us his hand. It was enormous; my own meaty-enough hand got lost in the sheer breadth of his. When he knew he had succeeded in shocking me, he shook his hand free, held it up in front of his eyes—his own wonder clear—and motioned to the gargantuan statue behind us.
“Just like Ramses,” he said, and we could not disagree.
Ibrahim had a wide, inviting smile and eyes that bore a resemblance more to the glass eyes of the sculpted works we had seen in the museum than to any living soul we had encountered. They were a dark amber and green combination.
211

“Here, my friend,” Ibrahim began, dropping a tiny blue ceramic scarab into my hand. “I like your smile,” he said. A sales pitch, I thought. Even though I knew better, I wanted to believe in his sincerity.
Both my son and I were strangely drawn to the mountain of a man in a brown and white vertically-striped Kaftan and matching pill-box cap. His skin was a few shades darker, the creases around his eyes deeper, and his gate slower than we had first noticed. His sandals displayed the weather-worn look of having braved the blowing desert sands of Memphis for many years.
“Come to my shop,” Ibrahim said as he pointed to a tiny stall. “There is no cost for looking.”
In a gesture of respect for his age, my son and I followed. Once there, he held out his arm in dramatic fashion to the array of Chinese-made, touristy trappings: all the Egyptian gods were in attendance: wide-winged Isis and stately Anubis, falcon-headed Horus and Ibis. Pyramids in plaster, camels, the cartouche of Pharaohs, colorful beads, ancient-looking pottery in plastic, and the nose-less sphinx, all sat ready for the rare visitor.
“Ni-hau,” Ibrahim smiled to a contingent of Chinese tourists.
“You speak Chinese?” I teased the older man.
“I speak everything, my dear,” he said, winking. “Whatever one needs,” he added
cryptically.
Ibrahim invited us to tea, and Collin and I suspended our scheduled tour to accept his
offer. Once settled, Ibrahim reached for and opened an old tin box, dented and discolored with age. He carefully spilled its contents onto the bench between us. Ancient Roman coins from the dawn of the Common Era and bits of Pharaonic statuary filled the space.
212

“My treasures,” he announced, picking out his favorites for inspection. “From digging a foundation,” Ibrahim explained.
It was amazing that the dusty Memphis ground—all these many years later—was still full of such time-worn objects. As Collin and I picked through the curiosities, Ibrahim spoke of having sons, but no daughters. He told me we were supposed to meet. A sales pitch? Maybe, but I felt the same about him. Our time would be short, however. According to our guide’s frantic insistence, seeing the monuments of the past was more important than interacting with the living, so we finished our tea and took our leave. Ibrahim smiled his almost toothless grin, his light caramel-green eyes shining, as he said good-bye to my son.
“Insha’allah (God willing),” Ibrahim turned and clasped my hand, “we will meet again, my daughter.”
My daughter. Someone in the world—a kindly older man in a dusty corner of forgotten Pharaonic Egypt—still called me daughter. And my place in the world finally felt a little firmer.
213

Lonely Tracks in the Hazy Heat: A Search for Home in the Desert
The smell of burning wood popping and snapping in shades of oranges and reds behind a polished black grate. Firs in their winter wear, bending under the weight of new ice. A cold late- night bedroom, and the contrast between chilled cheeks and the body cocooned in a comforter. The otherworldly sensation of a noiseless night when a tsunami of single snowflakes silences sound and re-sculpts the landscape. These are the images of profound longing. Of memory. Of home.
But here in the desert—where I’ve lived these last four years—I cannot watch the heat of my breath condense in the morning air or feel the quick-melt of snowflakes on my tongue. Yet, in this country that is so dramatically different from the places I have always known, the places I have always loved, I am becoming something new.
My journey has been reflected in and, in turn, supported by the very differences that make my new world so unique. Like the call to prayer, for example, and the smell of the slightly burned beans of Turkish coffee. Since moving to the Emirates, I wake to the brutal heat of the desert sun to exchange a lovely greeting with my neighbors. “Asalam aluaikum (peace be with you),” I say, attempting the guttural sounds of Arabic. I eat unleavened Afghani bread, a staple of almost every meal, and, at the pubs, drink tea, not beer. These daily differences bring me face- to-face with the expectations under which I have always existed, forcing me to examine if—and if so, how—they continue to contribute to the person I am becoming.
As guides in this transformational process, I look to the stories of my past and to those who have come face-to-face with and, in their own ways, adapted to the expectations of place. Among the stories is an experience from my childhood—almost forty years ago now—when my father’s cousin, desperate for help, brought her young daughter to join our big, sprawling brood.
214

“Tina needs you,” Karen told my father. “Can she come for the summer?” “What’s one more?” he shrugged in reply.
At ten years old, Tina was a wild child—a cyclone of mouth and impulsivity—all
wrapped up in a coarse and confident New Jersey accent. Smudged black eyeliner, not just on the top lid, but on the bottom as well, gave her the look of a prizefighter, a miniature Rocky Balboa. Built square-shaped and fleshy, she pulled her hair back into a too-tight ponytail that pinched her face into a perpetual sneer. Although Tina appeared tough—really tough—she was actually just sad. Really sad. The loss of her father a few years earlier had emptied her out; she filled the resulting hollowness with an almost-impenetrable wall. Karen believed my father would be able to breach the wall her daughter had built. But first, Tina would have to learn to live under his rules.
“Hey, Uncle Jack,” she kissed my father hello on her first morning. A good start. That evening, however, under a starry, summer sky, my oldest brother Mark found her
sitting with a group of much older boys, boys with reputations as bullies and druggies. Tina did not see him coming, and when she did, quickly hid a lit cigarette behind her back. The bad boys laughed at her reaction; Tina laughed too, in an attempt to reestablish her tough girl act. Mark did not laugh. Instead, he reached for Tina’s arm.
“Leave me alone!” she screamed. As she twisted and kicked and spat out hateful words, he dragged her to where my father sat waiting at the round kitchen table.
“You’re not my boss!” Tina yelled at him.
My father was unusually calm; only his fingers—tap-tap-tapping away—gave any
indication of his feelings. When he finally spoke, he was firm, but measured. He started by
215

explaining his expectations to Tina, using the tone of his voice to try and calm her. His monumental display of patience held solid, too, at least until Tina opened her mouth again.
“I’ll do what I want!” she shouted, breaking free of my brother’s grasp and racing for the door.
My father stood. “You go out that door, and I’ll spank you.”
Although we lived in a small village in the mountains of northeastern Pennsylvania, our town—like any town, anywhere—had its share of characters. Ours sported such trust-inspiring names as Pierogi, Zap, and Oogie. A religiously inclined eccentric, Moses—a peace-loving, pot- smoking, long-haired hippie-left-over from the ’60s—was harmless enough, but while my father expected us to be kind and respectful to everyone, he also worked hard to keep his children on the straight and moral path. “The people we choose,” he told us, “shape the people we become.” Having espoused such a principle, he was particularly sensitive about his children being around known drug-users. As a result, we lived in a kind of self-imposed Leave it to Beaver world.
Tina—coming as she did from a much more cosmopolitan experience in New Jersey— dismissed my father’s restrictions; to her, Pierogi, Zap, Oogie, and Moses reeked of small-town simplicity. Her vast experience as a city girl—or city child, as it were—had given her the tools to deal with such minor threats to her innocence. Or so she thought.
“I’ll do what I want!” she shouted, and threw open the door to our home. “You leave this house, and I’ll spank you,” he warned her again.
“I’ll call my mom,” she threatened. “She’ll come here and spank you.”
In mock panic, my dad held a hand to his chest. “You’ll call your mom on me?”
216

Although his own children understood the dripping sarcasm, Tina grossly misunderstood my father’s tone. With renewed vigor and now no fear at all, she responded to what she perceived as his weakening.
“Yes,” she yelled, grinning victoriously. “If you try and stop me, my mom will come here and spank you,”
“Fine.” My dad leaned back in his chair, hands folded behind his head. “But by the time she gets here, your spanking will be finished.”
An army guy through and through, my dad ruled with a loving discipline. We never had a single doubt—not one—that he loved us, but we also never confused his mandates as open for debate. If he had to swat us on the behind to make a point, he would. He never hurt us, of course, but a spanking humbled us. All of us basked in his approval—all of us; a spanking meant that we had, at least temporarily, lost his good opinion. None of us wanted that, and, as a result of this incident, Tina also figured it out. For the rest of the summer, she found a way to integrate her own values and beliefs with our family’s expectations, something she continued to work on for the next thirty-five years until her beloved Uncle Jack—my dad—died. From that one summer, Tina formed a lifelong bond with a second family, in a place dramatically different from the place she had always known.
As a woman in a majority Arab-Muslim country, I too have had to incorporate a host of new expectations into what I thought was an already fully formed concept of who I am. Or was. I have learned not to offer my hand to a man in greeting. I have learned to cover my arms, my legs, my neck for the sake of modesty, and I have learned to soften my very American, very hearty laugh. As an American in the Middle East, I have learned that time is not money; in conversations and correspondence, I am obliged to spend time exchanging pleasantries before
217

effecting a transaction. When someone asks Kayf halik?, it is a genuine question; an honest reply is expected: I’m fine, thank you. And whatever the answer, it is always followed by thanking God, Al Hamdulillah; it is a saying I have grown to love. And use.
Still, my integration into this new place was unsteady at best, especially at the beginning when I submitted to these new expectations without taking into consideration my own needs, my own desires, me. I held a part of myself in abeyance while I negotiated a way to live in this new place without loneliness and heartache.
One of the first things I grappled with was what might make me haram. Haram is an Arabic word that incorporates a boatload of English words—sin, immorality, disgrace, un-God- like behavior, deceitfulness. Haram is the word that distinguishes between simple breaches of etiquette and the more egregious sins of cultural and religious violations. For a simple two- syllable utterance, it sure packs a punch, and it is not taken lightly by the Arabs. Nope. Haram is a serious allegation with serious, long-term consequences. No court in the world can mitigate its fallout; haram sits firmly in God’s territory. So I learned early to take the word seriously and worked hard to be fully on the side of its opposite—halal. Sometimes I tried too hard, however, neglecting my own needs in the transformation equation.
Such as the way I choose to dress.
Although also an important consideration in the West, clothing in the Muslim world projects substantial cues as to a person’s identity, values, and beliefs. I choose not to wear a hijab, the head covering of Muslim women. Without it, I boldly announce who I am. However, I do follow the convention of being conservatively covered: no tank tops, no shorts, no bathing suits, no minis. In the searing heat of the desert sun, following this expectation is both respectful
218

and, in deference to my fair Irish skin, prudent. However, after a year or two of dressing conservatively, I began to grapple with balance.
The first time I dared venture out in short sleeves, I wanted to gauge my husband’s reaction. Fadi is tall and silver-haired with complementary silver wire-rimmed glasses that frame his honey-brown eyes. He is urbane, sophisticated, an Arab version of the black-tails-white-tie- wearing 1940s film star. After a day speed-watching a season of Spartacus, however, Fadi appeared to have reverted to some kind of fist-pumping, loud-mouthed, gray-haired adolescent. In a screen-induced haze, he began to repeat the lines of the gladiators in a loud Arab-English. I had to stand between him and the TV to break his trance.
“Haram,” he said when he noticed my bare arms. “But you wear short sleeves,” I said, pointing. “That’s different.”
“If you can wear short sleeves, so can I.”
“It’s haram,” he tried again, looking around me to the TV screen.
“I am an American,” I said, hoping that it would explain everything, something, anything. “I have changed a lot to live here!”
My husband, absorbed in a fight to the death between two bald and sweating gladiators, was not interested in debating short sleeves with me.
“Kill them all!” Spartacus screamed from the TV. “Fadi,” I began with a deep breath.
“Kill them all!” Fadi repeated with boyish glee. “Fadi?”
“Kill them all!” he said again with a fist pump, still not looking at me.
219

“And I’m the haram one?” I whispered. That day I left the house in short sleeves.
As I reassert my core principles, I also add more color to my world or, at least, to my wardrobe—especially reds. We don’t wear red here, I was told early in my tenure. It took me some time to extricate myself from the imaginary we of such statements, but I eventually rediscovered the person residing within who loves the boldness and power of the color. In balance. I choose red sparingly, as an accessory, a splash of color, a statement, a contrast to the typical black. As often as not, this leads to compliments. This is taboo, especially when the compliment is issued from male to female. “We” don’t do that here, I think after I am complimented, feeling every bit the rebel. In red, of course. Haram.
Now, at the start of my fourth year of desert exile, I feel less like a refugee and more like someone who belongs. I speak a little Arabic, have a small network of friends—some Arabic, some Western—and navigate the culture with more ease. There are still times, however, when my heart breaks for the people and places and tastes of my past, and when it does, I make it a point to connect with what used to be.
One fall evening, feeling particularly nostalgic, I called home to talk to my mother. A long decline into Alzheimer’s had noticeably accelerated after the unexpected death of my father, her one tether to the past. One of my sisters cared for her at home, but it had become more and more demanding, and Karen, Tina’s mom, had offered to stay with my mother while my sister and her family spent the day together. And so, the night I called my mother, it was Karen who answered the phone.
“I heard you got married.”
“Yes,” I responded, noting her skeptical tone. “Are you happy?”
220

“Yes. We’re so much alike.”
“Your mom loves him. She even remembers his name.”
This was a point of contention. My mom had trouble remembering the names of her
children’s spouses and even their children, but she always remembered to ask about Fadi. I believe it was because he spent time dancing with her, playing the piano, and singing songs in Arabic. It was the Arabic that she loved the most.
“Tell me your name,” she would ask him regularly. Like, every fifteen minutes regularly.
“Fadi. Moustafa. Hassan. Saeed,” he’d say, throwing her into fits of laughter. “You say it,” he’d urge, and gobbledygook would spill from her mouth.
Then to me, she’d add, “I never expected you to marry someone with that name.” “Neither did I, mom,” I would laugh. “Neither did I.”
On the phone, Karen continued to toss polite detective-like lobs at me. I knew what she
wanted to ask, but I wasn’t going to make it easy on her. I explained how we met, how we hadn’t dated before marrying, how well we got along. And then it came; it was just too tantalizing for her to avoid.
“And he’s Muslim?”
“Yup.”
“And what’s it like?”
“What’s what like?” I asked.
“You know, him being Muslim and all.” “Normal.”
“Normal?” she asked incredulously; “but he’s Muslim.” “He doesn’t have horns,” I answered sarcastically.
221

“He doesn’t believe in God.”
And there it was.
“He believes in God,” I answered.
By now, the voice of my dad in battle with Tina so many summers before was on replay
in my mind. As I reimagined the whole conversation about curfews, I remembered the look on his face, finally understanding what I had not noticed then: he knew where Tina’s obstinacy was heading and was just waiting for the chance to use the zinger he had contrived as its ending. Like the Scots waiting to engage in battle in the movie, Braveheart—Hold! Hold!—my dad bit his lip and laid his trap, waiting for Tina to step into it. Eventually she did.
And so would her mom. It was all about timing. And patience.
There was a smugness in Karen’s tone. “But he doesn’t believe in our God.”
“It’s the same God.”
“Really?” she asked, getting ready to prove me wrong. “So, who’s this Allah fellow
then?” Her voice was triumphant.
“Who’s Allah?” I asked. Hold! Hold! I heard in my mind.
“Allah is not our God. We worship the true God; they worship Allah.” “They speak Arabic here.” Hold! Hold!
“I know that.”
“Well Allah means God in Arabic.”
“Oh.”
“Even the Arab Christians call him Allah.”
“Oh.”
“Can I talk to my mom?”
222

“Uh, yeah. Hold on.”
I could almost see my father smiling, shaking his head in recognition of a well-played, small–minded, conversation-ending lob. After the short chat with my mother—during those days they were always short—I hung up and realized how far I had come. A few years ago, would I have known that Allah meant God? Of course, I told myself. Would I have known that Muslims worship the same God? Almost certainly, I thought.
But my own mind countered: Maybe not.
These days, though, just as the sun begins its ascent over the Arabian Gulf, God’s name—Allah—pierces the pre-dawn hours from the tower-like minarets of the masjids. A hauntingly beautiful moment, the call to prayer is a profound harbinger of the light that follows even the darkest nights. On its cue, in the red sand waves of the desert, single-humped camels in browns and tans and the occasional white rise up and once again leave their lonely tracks in the hazy heat. Oud-incensed bazaars—souqs—offer gold and silver, goat’s meat and lamb’s wool, coffee and tea and a sea of spices. And the aroma of almond bread pudding—umm ali—fills the early-morning air with comfort.
Had I not moved to a new country, all the stereotypes and misinformation I’d accepted over the course of my life might have led me to answer in a very different way. But I did move. And my life changed, widening to include diverse viewpoints, cultures, languages—and the expectations of a greater world. I am grateful for this more expansive me. These days, when I walk through the front door of our little rented villa, I am home.
Al Hamdulillah.
223

The Almost Unseen
Working in Dubai meant getting used to everything being the biggest, the best, the brightest. There was the world’s tallest building—the Burj Khalifa, the world’s most expensive hotel—the Burj al Arab, the biggest fireworks display on New Year’s Eve, the largest mall, the greatest man-made island, the most famous water fountain show. Dubai was a clean city, a scrupulously clean city, a hard-to-believe clean city, especially coming from other places like New York or Paris or London. Like Disney World, every sign of garbage, any type of offense, every uninvited weed, crumb, or unattractive adornment was scrubbed from its squeaky-clean image.
There was no graffiti either. None. No one would dare. Not even pollution was permitted to discolor the bridges and tunnels of Dubai; before there was a chance of any type of greying, highway structures were scoured and, if needed, repainted. They remained hospital-white bright despite the soot of the millions of cars that entered and left the city daily, the grit of the choking exhaust from motorbikes and buses, long-haul trucks and passenger cars, and the wear and tear of being sandblasted by the detritus of the desert; yes, despite all this, the infrastructure of the Middle East’s most iconic city would not be affected. By royal decree, the city would remain clean. And an army of cleaners—not Emirati—would make it so.
It was not just the big infrastructure that kept up the appearance of snowy white and sparkling, however. The smaller, humbler buildings of the not-too-distant past were regularly demolished, a sacrifice for the glimmering, glass-walled skyscrapers of the now. Gardens were planted lush with vegetation and tended and watered and pruned to distraction by an army of workers from other, poorer countries. Buildings that got in the way of a new canal that those same workers dug in the unendurable heat of the desert summer were annihilated with only a few
224

months’ notice, and on the day that the waters of the Arabian Gulf were released into the canal, anything and everything in its way was also erased from the memory of old Dubai for the new spit-polish image of a city billing itself as a modern oasis.
The insides of buildings, too, were scrubbed and buffed and polished. With their mirror- like surfaces of glass and marble, the movements of the inhabitants inside were reflected out, making the space feel somehow more crowded. But forest greens and colorful flowers of pinks and yellows and reds, impeccably planned and cultivated to mimic the outdoors, provided a welcome respite from the hard surfaces of the inside world and the harsh desert heat of the outside. In Dubai, there was a glittering, gleaming image of excellence, of flawlessness, of impossible perfection. And because of this, the wealthy of the world come to see and be seen in Dubai.
“Kim Kardashian is here today,” one of my students announced in class one day. “Great,” I said a bit less enthusiastically.
“She’s going to my sister’s school,” she added in a way that made the social media star
sound downright altruistic.
“So?” another student asked. “I saw Messi.”
In Dubai, no matter how popular the movie star or social media star, they were trumped
by Lionel Messi, Barcelona’s soccer sensation. In general, there was a steady stream of stars of all stripes that paraded through the glittering spectacle that is Dubai, and they worked to add their shimmer to the shine of the city.
Yet, there was also a world of the unseen—or of the almost unseen found just under the veneer of perfection. Like worker bees in a hive, hundreds of workers—thousands of workers, perhaps millions of workers—spent their days—six days each week—creating the image of the
225

beautifully spotless, ever-so-perfect city. Rarely were they noticed or appreciated as the individuals they are. Rarely were they recognized as people worthy of respect, as the people who preserve the city’s perfection.
In my time in Dubai, I made it a habit to notice the almost unseen, the men and women from Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, India, Pakistan, and Nepal. At first, I offered a simple smile. A wave. A thank you. I looked directly into their eyes when we spoke, and I asked about their children, their spouses. I asked for names and tried to remember them. When I ate or drank, I cleaned up after myself. I made my own tea, ordered my own food, carried my own groceries. I made it a point so that they knew they were appreciated. At least by me.
And in return, they made it a point to let me know that I was seen. By them. Simple smiles, respect, a kind word, a nod—these were the things that bridged our differences, bringing into focus that which we shared. We recognized in each other a similar mix of emotions; we were exiles. We were brothers and sisters in longing and wistfulness for our homes, our families, the things we loved, the places we knew and cherished. We shared each other’s otherness. Although each of the countries we cherished was unique, we talked about home and going home and being at home, and we tapped into a central core of human emotion that we all shared about the places at the center of our hearts. About home.
“Miss?” one Ethiopian man whispered to me a few days before winter break. “Hello,” I nodded.
“I’m sorry to bother you, miss,” he hedged, eyes down. It occurred to me that I had
always the one to initiate the conversation, not him, and he felt the weight of this change in circumstances.
“No bother, Biruk. What’s up?” I answered.
226

“You’re going to Addis Ababa, miss?”
“Yes,” I smiled. “I’m going for Christmas.”
“It’s not Christmas there. We’re orthodox,” Biruk corrected me.
“Yeah, I know, Biruk. I meant my Christmas.”
“By yourself, miss?” he asked.
“Yes, my husband is staying home.”
The man leaned his broom against the wall, reached into his pocket, and pulled out a
sheet of paper. “These are the best restaurants, miss. And the churches to see. And my family’s mobile if you need anything.”
“Thank you,” I said, accepting his gift.
“My family. They’re waiting for your visit,” he added. The invitation had turned into an obligation.
Obligation or not, however, I knew I would not spend my Christmas alone, unnoticed, unseen. I would have a family—albeit one I did not know. Yet. My new family would open their home to me, a stranger in a strange country. I would have a place even in far-off Ethiopia to celebrate when my own family was so far away. I would be seen, acknowledged, appreciated. A beautiful gift, to be sure.
And maybe, if I was very lucky, I could tell Biruk’s family a little about the perfection their son brings to the beautiful, gleaming city of Dubai, a place that would not be the same without him. And they would know that his work was respected and that he was seen. In his new home.
227

Hello Lucy
I fall asleep to a chorus of howling dogs and the beat-beat-beat of the music from a not- so-distant disco; the cool breezes of an Ethiopian night blow through my hotel window. It is a Friday night, a few days before the first Christmas day as an orphan. When I awake, the cool blue of the ancient Abyssinian skies heralds the destiny I will complete. On December 23, 2017. Or, at least, that is the date at home.
Time is different-behaving in Ethiopia. It is 2010 here, something my 2017 self cannot begin to explain. New Year’s Day is celebrated in September, not in January, and while my cell phone registers the time as 7:00AM, the Ethiopian clocks say 1:00PM. In a reasonably practical understanding of how day and night works, Ethiopians start their clocks at dawn: 1:00PM. Twelve hours later, when people are just beginning to wind down from their days, Ethiopians note the beginning of night as 1:00AM. It is, I admit, awfully confusing, but since I am only a visitor to this ancient kingdom, I will be the one to bend to the fluidity of their time.
Before I left for Addis Ababa, my sister and I texted each other. Me: Going on Friday.
Sister: Ethiopia isn’t my idea of a fun vacation.
Me: Africa is beautiful. Breathtakingly beautiful.
Sister: Better you than me.
Why Ethiopia? my sister wants to know. To fulfill a promise I made long ago. Someone has been waiting for me for a very long time. The compulsion to go comes from deep in my past, from the stories I read as a child. With him. His taste was for the exotic—3 million-year-old fossils, an immense Buddha carved into the face of mountains, ancient ruins found under the sea, the vestiges of past civilizations, lions and zebra, elephants and giraffes; these are the things that
228

captured his attention and, through him, mine as well. And so as an adult, I have been on a mission to touch those things we read about—if only with my eyes—as a testament to him. Because he could not.
On my first full day in Addis Ababa, then, I pay a visit to the woman I came to see. I stand in front of her, a tiny incomplete skeleton in a glass box, millennia removed from the friends and family she must have known.
“Hello Lucy,” I say.
She has traveled 3.2 million years to me; I have traveled a little more than 7000 miles and 40 years to her. Around us are other links to our collective past, including Australopithecus man. These relics are not new to me; I have seen them all before—these ancient ancestors—in the pages of magazines.
While I stand in the National Museum of Ethiopia, I am transported to the kitchen of my childhood home. At the round wooden pedestal table, my father has just received his most recent copy of Time Magazine, one of the few luxuries he allows himself. On the cover is Richard Leakey, the famous archaeologist; inside is a story of ancient life come to life in recent finds. Together with National Geographic, Time opens our little world of Delano, Pennsylvania, to the world beyond, something my father craved. A craving he passed on to me.
“Listen to this,” my father orders as he reads the cover story to my mother and me. “To see things like this,” he marvels, pointing to the model of Australopithecus man on the cover.
“Go to Africa,” I tease him. “See for yourself.”
“Africa?” my mom echoes with incredulity.
“Not me,” my dad shakes his head. “Too late. You go for me, huh?” “Okay,” the eleven-year-old me promises.
229

Forty years later, I have come to fulfill that promise in a dimly lit basement of the National Museum of Ethiopia. All around me is evidence of an ancient past. All around me are the real objects of the stories my father and I read together. From Time Magazine and National Geographic.
Because time is so fluid here in Ethiopia, I am not constrained by the international date or time of day. If it can be 2010 in 2017, it might as well be 1977. So I become a fifty-one-year-old woman who sees everything through the eyes an eleven-year old child. My dad stands with me in front of Lucy, sporting the wavy black hair and gray-blue eyes he had in my youth. My beautiful mother arrives, too, placing her hand in my hair, stroking it as she did when I was a child.
In Ethiopian time, I am whole again with them beside me; I will not navigate this Christmas alone. A reprieve, I think. Here. In Ethiopia. This is why I have come, I say to myself, wondering if I can explain it to my sister.
“Lucy,” I whisper; “my dad says hello.”
230

Mama Joanne
I went to Kenya to heal, to delight in the history and beauty of the land, its rhythm, its people. I went to Kenya to feel whole again, to feel connected, loved, purposeful. In the years since I had moved to the Middle East, both my parents had passed. I was lost, an orphan cut off from my past, untethered to what was, and unable to see what might be. Numb, I could neither fully grieve nor fully live. So, I went to Kenya to reconnect with the ageless and wise, the primordial. She called me, Kenya did. She beckoned me, courted me. She held out a promise: here, you can find and, then, bury your sorrow in ancient lands that renew.
“Taxi?” a man asked as I made my way through the airport.
“How much?” I asked.
Jimmy was a huge-hearted, smallish man with a twitching, pulsing energy that wound
him up like a top and exploded in excitement with any—even the smallest—type of adventure. “American?” Jimmy asked without answering my question.
“How’d you know?”
“Everything’s a hurry,” he answered.
“I’m Jackie,” I said slowing down to offer him my hand. “How much?”
“How long in Nairobi?” he answered my question with a question.
“Five days,” I replied to the diminutive driver.
“Yes,” Jimmy answered as if I had asked something. “I will be your guide for five days.” “How much?” I asked for the third time.
“We’ll come to an agreement in the car,” Jimmy said, taking my suitcase and nodding to his taxi.
In the days ahead, I would learn of the extraordinary land that Kenyans know as ordinary.
231

All around me were signs of the miraculous: the layered pinks and purples and comforting grey- blue of the East African sky, the rolling, tumbling clouds of daytime, the green-brown grass of the savannah, the perfume of sweet-burning firewood, the complicated geometric pattern of a giraffe’s skin, its long eye lashes, the gnarled barks of generations-old trees. In Kenya, mother baboons with clinging babies scurried and screeched and crisscrossed streets and the front yards of businesses while long-tailed birds swooped and cried overhead. Behind craggy-branched acacia trees that spread shelter and shadows across the light brown silt of the earth, the shimmering gold of the morning sun pierced the lilac-dark of dawn.
The East African landscape had a natural music; it wove itself in and around and through everything. It was ancient, primal, and it was made physical by the long-limbed Maasai warriors who, with stick or spear in hand, never stood still. When they stopped their forward motion, they moved vertically; jumping was meant to disorient potential enemies, a warning sign of readiness, their muscles tensed, energy flowing. In their garish garments of red and orange, striped, and plaided, wrapped around the waist and flung over arms, warriors vocalized the sound of the land they inhabited. A low throaty base—yo, hey, yo-ha-dee—marked their movement across the savannah while a higher, plaintive cry pierced the steady beat. It was the sound of the land itself, the music of a nation.
A few years earlier at the beginning of my tenure in the northernmost town of the United Arab Emirates, Skype was a godsend as my loneliness for home increased. In those early days of exile, my father controlled the pace and content of our calls, a role he had only recently embraced. Before the advance of Alzheimer’s, my mother had been the talker, not him. But during my first year in the UAE, my father passed away, and I found I had lost both parents at
232

once: one to death, the other to memory loss. Suddenly each call home sounded like every other call home.
“Hi, mom. How are you?”
“Jaclyn! Where are you?” she’d ask.
“Still in Ras al Khaimah. Do you remember?” I’d remind her.
“Are you still American?” she’d ask.
“I am, mom. I just live in another country,” I’d say.
“Okay. I love you,” she’d say, noting the end of her ability to interact. “I love you too, mom,” I’d reply in kind.
My mother’s inability to engage in words would only get worse. Without my dad, we would have to find each other again through touch. Going home would be the only way we—mother and daughter—could communicate.
“I’ll give you fifteen minutes,” Jimmy said as I left the taxi for my Nairobi hotel. “What?”
“Fifteen minutes,” he said, tapping the broken Timex on his wrist. Time had stopped on
Jimmy’s watch. “Giraffes,” he added as an incentive.
“But I need a shower. I haven’t slept all night,” I said.
“No time,” he said tapping his watch again.
Eighteen minutes later, Jimmy and I headed for our first adventure.
By the time I arrived home for Christmas, the insidious disease had laid waste to my mother. She could neither walk nor control her own body. She had forgotten how to swallow.
233

Hair-brushing, help with eating, and dressing were performed by her daughters and nieces. Although she no longer cared about lipstick, she continued to insist on wearing jewelry. Like the silver elephant necklace with the up-turned trunk. Except for the rare moment of clarity—always short-lived, my mother simply existed, waiting and preparing for the next phase of her life.
Knowing she was beginning a transition, I traced age spots on her arms, willing myself to record their distinct constellation. Remember, I told myself. When I brushed back her brown- colored bangs, I noted the texture of her hair, and I watched for the occasional bursts of light from her soft gray-blue eyes. Know me, mom, I willed. We spoke without words by holding hands. Sometimes I sat on the floor beside her, and she played with my hair, just as she had when I was a child. She smiled when I sang. I told her stories, teased her, made her laugh, and I calmed her as she recognized loved ones who had already passed.
“There he is again,” my mother pointed into space.
“Who mommy?” I asked.
“That man with the black, curly hair. Look,” she pointed.
“Ask him his name,” I suggested.
“John, he says.” Then, she turned to me, “I don’t like him here.”
“Is it daddy, mom?”
“Daddy’s up there,” she said pointing towards heaven.
“Ask him what he wants,” I suggested, and she did.
“I can’t go!” she yelled at the apparition in front of her, and she shushed him away. “Tell daddy I said hello, mom. OK?”
234

She turned to the empty space in front of her, her face softening, her eyes watering, and began to mumble under her breath. I faded from the room as she interacted with her life-mate, her love. Soon, she relaxed. Then, she smiled. Light returned to her eyes.
“Thank you, daddy,” I whispered.
On my second morning in Kenya, Jimmy arranged for us to have breakfast together. I paid, of course; meals were part of our bargain. Once we finished, we headed to the animal preserve where animals were rescued, rehabilitated, and trained to reenter the wild. Although their stories were bleak, baby elephants were bottle-fed in front of the oohing and ahhing of adoring crowds. Before coming to the preserve, the babies watched as poachers bludgeoned their mothers for ivory; when the poachers were finished, they left the babies to die, wailing at the sides of their mothers. The rescuers who found the babies provided strong witness to the grim task of poaching.
“They do not forget,” a ranger declared, and those at the orphanage saw the truth of his words in the sorrowful eyes of the elephants. “Ivory,” he told us, “makes you a link in the chain that kills the mother.”
A few weeks after the Christmas visit with my mother when I was back in my little villa on the Arabian Gulf, my sister called. The visits from long-gone loved ones had increased—my grandmother, my grandfather, my uncle and great aunt. My mother had a sense her end was near, and she feared it; she looked at the other-worldly visits as harbingers. And because of her fear, my sister held her each night as she settled into sleep. On the night of my sister’s call, my mother sat up in bed, stretched out her arms, and began to sway to some distant music in her mind.
235

“It’s been a long time since we danced,” she told my father.
My sister watched my mom with her spirit husband. Our spirit dad. After almost forty- five minutes, my mother dropped her arms, laid back down in bed, and slept. She died the next day, returning to John, the man with the curly, black hair. Her dance partner. My dad.
Although I returned home for the funeral, I did not—I could not—mourn. It was impossible for me to believe that I was alone, an orphan, and so I put on a brave front and packed my heart with ice, walling it off from feeling, and committing myself to live in a permanent state of impermeable stasis.
As the ranger talked, one of the really little elephants made her way around the enclosure of tourists moving from hand to hand; she wore a colorful red blanket on her back and little sprigs of old-man-like hair sprouted on her head. As my turn came, I reached out, and she bowed her head into my hand. The baby elephant began to cry.
“Tamiyoi,” the keeper announced; “she cries for her mother.”
“Adopt her,” Jimmy whispered; “she recognizes you as mama.”
“You are loved, little one,” I choked out as I touched her head, her ears, under her neck.
“I understand.”
The orphaned baby elephant raised her trunk in the air, and this action reminded me of
my mother’s silver elephant necklace. She had always loved elephants especially those with raised trunks. “They were good luck,” my mother said. Particularly at the end of her life, elephants were powerful talismans against the insidious Alzheimer’s that sought to claim
her. Her elephant necklace reminded her of my dad. “He gave this to me,” she said even though he did not. Still, it helped her to remember. And Tamiyoi’s raised trunk helped me to remember
236

her. Right there. In Kenya.
At the moment when my memories joined with little Tamiyoi’s anguish, the good cry that
should have come with my mother’s death in January, but did not, suddenly came tsunami style in Nairobi, far from my mom. Yet, close to her, too. With the elephants. With baby Tamiyoi.
In an act of understanding—because that is all I can attribute it to, really—little Tamiyoi bound her baby elephant trunk around my forearm. Only for seconds. Enough time for one orphan to recognize the pain of another. A few seconds later, Tamiyoi left me and began, once again, to work the crowd.
Stunned, wordless, I scanned the rest of the baby elephants, hoping to secure a mental imprint of the spirit, the beauty, the spectacle. They romped in the red clay dust, taking it up into their trunks and showering it down on each other. They nuzzled. They played. They formed a family from their brokenness. Before I turned to leave, I searched for Tamiyoi who, as I looked to her, turned her head back to look at me. Our eyes met once again. In understanding. Then, I turned and walked away.
A few minutes later, I adopted Tamiyoi. Although it was a staggering amount of money for Kenyans, the fifty dollar a year commitment for the next ten years seemed reasonable enough to me.
“Tamiyoi will bear the designation Mama Jaclyn,” the guide declared with my payment. “No. Not Jaclyn,” I said. “Joanne. Make it Joanne.”
“On this night, she will learn she is no longer an orphan,” the keeper pronounced.
And I realized I was not an orphan either despite the new condition that separated my
mother from me. It was only physical. She was still with me. Always with me.
Mama Joanne, the keeper wrote on Tamiyoi’s new plaque. Mama Joanne, I thought.
237

“Jimmy,” I called. “Thank you.”
“Not at all,” he answered. “Where to?” Jimmy asked checking his no-time Timex.
“To the hotel,” I said.
“To Karen Blixen’s house,” he decided for me.
Once at the iconic home of Out of Africa’s Isak Dinesen, I walked under the concrete and
vegetation-wrapped pergola to the tree line at the back of the home. On the little wood-chipped trail through the woods, I looked for a clearing where I laid on my back to look up at the vast East African sky. Birds—big ones and small ones, greyish-black and splendidly colored ones, high-pitched singers and squawkers, flyers and squatters and those in between—hid in low-to- the-ground scrub brush and in high fuchsia-topped trees that spread their arms high and wide; their twitter and cawing echoed the natural hum of the land. I looked up to the sky—symbolic, I guess—where white clusters of clouds bumped into each other as they moved slowly across the horizon, a patch of grey renegades threatened the perfection of a comfortably cool summer day. Enveloped in such a primal mix of sound and scent and scenery, my heart continued the process of opening that began with little Tamiyoi’s empathy. Within minutes of connecting with the earth, my chest heaved with great, emptying sobs.
“Thank you,” I whispered to the great, serene sky before moving back along the little wood-chipped trail through the woods, under the concrete and vegetation-wrapped pergola, through Karen Blixen’s home, to Jimmy, leaning against his taxi. He smiled and nodded.
“Feeling better?” he asked.
A smile ribboned across my tear-stained cheeks, and I felt the process beginning. I had come to Kenya to heal, and in her wisdom, she bound one lonely soul to another. Orphans no longer.
238

At the Rooftop of the World
Tibet. The Sherpas and summit-scaling hopefuls of Mt. Everest competed for attention with mountain-top temples where pilgrims left offerings of silky white scarves and sweet- smelling yak butter at the feet of golden Buddhas. Birds chirped in the late summer afternoon while tingshas tingled and the guttural sound of conch horns radiated out from the red-roofed, golden-spired temples. In colorfully-dyed woolens, women with long hair plaited with vibrant- hued ribbons pushed carts across cobblestones, carried children or farm animals, and stuck their tongues out in greeting. “Tashi delek,” they said when they passed. Red-robed monks with shaved heads, prayer beads, and yellow, contrasting tunics wandered the steep passages of stone, mumbling their petitions, spinning prayer wheels, and posing for tourists. In a reversal of the norm, a Chinese man spotted the fair skin of my daughter, the mark of a foreigner.
“American?” he asked.
She answered in Chinese.
“Picture?” he asked in English while he shook his head yes in front of her face. When she
agreed to his request, he handed his phone to a passing monk. “Take picture?” he asked.
The Chinese man posed proudly next to Katlyn, his chest puffed out, his left arm resting
cautiously on her back. He smiled for the picture in a courtyard of pavers in a high-up temple. The bare-armed monk with a black backpack snapped the picture, and the Chinese man adjusted his stance away from my daughter. “No,” the monk said and held his hand out to stop
any further movement. He reached into the pocket of his monk’s robes and pulled out an iPhone, and while he snapped a picture of Katlyn and the Chinese man, I took my own of the monk taking the picture. So meta.
239

Sitting in the cloud cover of the Himalayas, the capital city, Lhasa, was a maze of intersecting, circular alleyways of small markets and souvenir storefronts. Whitewashed buildings, their rows of deep-set windows, colorful balconies, and heavy well-worn wooden doors lined the street, an homage to another, more enigmatic Tibet. Pilgrims walked the sacred path. A centrifugal force of the spiritual, the path swallowed up all who entered the old Tibetan quarter.
Known as the kora, the sacred path brought visitors shoulder-to-shoulder with Tibetans in traditional dress. Most chanted supplications, spun prayer wheels, and carried sacred
beads. Many guided their animals along the path—dogs and goats, mostly. Some atoned with ritualized humility. All smiled in the ecstasy of their spiritual practice. Even for the most cynical, the kora opened a world of deep personal reflection and revelation.
While Lhasa was beautiful and spiritual, it was also a city that sat 12,000 feet above sea level. The air was so thin that any type of physical exertion—even walking—was made especially difficult, even dangerous. Along with an increased heartbeat, dizziness, and nausea, failing to adjust to the altitude could result in chest congestion, decreased consciousness, blue- tinged skin, and death. It was imperative, therefore, to acclimate to the harsh conditions.
A few hours into our excursion, however, I sat almost unresponsive in a glass-box infirmary in the lobby of an expensive Chinese hotel; my heart pumped maniacally to carry the necessary oxygen, and my lungs strained and burned with the lack of it. Although miserable with the thought of potentially leaving Tibet, I was so sick that sadness stood secondary to survival. As I sat in the glass-walled infirmary, a large group of Chinese patrons were glued to the glass, watching the sick white woman with the Chinese-speaking daughter.
“Altitude sickness,” the young female doctor announced in Chinese. “Very bad.”
240

I already knew that.
While altitude was the easiest explanation for why my heart had over-reacted, I believed it also responded to the phantom images and feelings of a besieged people. Tibet, a once- autonomous country, had been invaded and, ultimately, annexed by the Chinese in 1959. Yet, in a place where it was dangerous not to acclimate, the Tibetans continued to publicly practice their religion and culture. They choose danger over submission to political authority.
Early one morning, my daughter and I rose before dawn, early enough to enter the old quarter without our guide. Falling into the centrifugal flow of the temple’s powerful kora, we heard street vendors hawk the morning’s offerings: sticks of perfumed incense and strings of multicolored prayer flags. Sage burned sweet in large terracotta burners, and underfoot, the uneven pavers glistened with the previous night’s thunderstorm. Housing the earliest image of the Buddha, Jokhang Temple sat at the spiritual heart of the city.
“Look, mom,” Katlyn said and pointed to a group of pilgrims prostrating themselves.
Every few steps, the pious bowed, placed their hands on their knees, and then moved to all fours. In an act of utter devotion, they slid their hands and knees out and away from their bodies. Now fully prostrate—their stomachs touching the cool, wet ground and their arms stretched out above their heads—the supplicants reversed the process, coming back to a standing position. A few steps later, they began the process all over again.
“It’s so wet and cold,” Katlyn said.
“Hard core,” I marveled.
Around the temple, the completion of each mini-prayer was marked one bead at a time
through the thumbs and forefingers of the devout. Hundreds of them. Candles were lit with yak butter offerings. Bells clanged on the belts of the believers and from handheld prayer wheels;
241

finger cymbals, colorful ribbons of silver ornaments, and the low hum of chanting added to the morning’s music.
“It’s amazing they practice so openly,” I nodded to the Chinese guards.
“Shh,” Katlyn warned.
While pilgrims moved clockwise, the soldiers bucked the centrifugal pull of the spiritual
traffic and moved counter-clockwise in an obvious display of power. They were young, but imposing, waiting and watching for any sign of protest. There would be no insurrection. Not on their watch. Not by Tibetans. Not by activist foreigners. Take heed, their counter-clockwise perambulation warned. And subconsciously I did. I ingested their fear.
“Tell your mother,” the Chinese doctor said, “to stand up. I will give her medicine.”
“She wants you to stand,” Katlyn translated and took my arm to make it happen. “Turn around,” she added.
As I turned my back to the hotel lobby, the doctor swiftly separated me from my pants and emptied the syringe into my very white, Irish-skinned butt. It practically glowed, and for a little while, my butt became the light source for the little infirmary. The Chinese who had been captivated by my every movement whipped out their cell phones and started snapping pictures of my compromised state. I could see flashes flickering from where I stood and imagined what might go viral on Chinese Facebook that night. After a few hours and an IV drip, I felt good enough to return to our little hotel in the heart of Lhasa. The next morning, Katlyn and I would join the pilgrims’ climb to the Potala Palace.
242

“Go slow,” the Tibetan guide cautioned us on our way to the Dalai Lama’s winter home. “We’ll meet at the top.”
“You okay, mom?” Katlyn asked as we began the trek to 13,000 feet.
“No problem,” I lied.
Each stone step pushed my overactive beating heart, yet I persisted, one step at a time,
not hurrying, not worrying about how long it would take me. Like the Tibetans around me, my ego had fallen away with the task in front of me. My humiliation with the picture-taking Chinese the night before had certainly helped.
As we entered the palace, the Chinese invasion came into focus, its past superimposed upon my present. I felt the monks as they stood praying on each level of the palace, holding neither weapons nor malice; I felt the fear of the Chinese soldiers as they advanced, firing on each successive group of monks. The soldiers simply walked over the bleeding bodies to the next landing and began the process all over again.
“Mom,” Katlyn warned as I began to cry; “you can’t do that here.”
My daughter had spent nearly a year studying in China; she understood the expectations of the government and lived by them because she knew they were temporary; eventually Katlyn would return to the freedom of her own country. Any sign of compassion for the Tibetans would be untenable, she told me; an outburst from me would be seen as inciting sedition.
“Do you feel the massacre?” she whispered.
I shook my head and pointed to holes in the walls around us. Bullet holes. “You can’t cry here,” Katlyn warned me.
243

The higher we climbed into the palace, the subtler the feelings became until, at last, we came to the throne room of the Dalai Lama. Like a burst of fresh air, peace filled me, pushing out the suffering from the monks' brave last stand. I felt light. Buoyant. Thankful.
“What do you feel?” I asked Katlyn.
“Really spiritual.”
“So many prayers still live in this room,” I responded.
In that moment, a young Tibetan girl came up beside me and reached for my hand. She
led me down the ladder-like steps to the meditation room. She did not speak English; I did not speak Tibetan. I turned to gauge her family’s approval; they nodded, smiling at me. She belongs here, I thought, taking notice of my breathing for the first time since morning. It had normalized; I had finally acclimated. I belong here, too, I smiled at the little girl, holding my hand.
Once outside the palace, Katlyn and I sat on one of the large stone steps, and the young Tibetan girl found me and sat on my lap; her family gathered around my daughter and me. We just sat. All of us together. And breathed in a beautiful moment of shared humanity in the thin air of Tibet. We had accepted each other; we had acclimated.
And as Tibet became less exotic and more normal for us, Katlyn and I spent more time with the Tibetans. One morning, we moved inside the great temple in the heart of the city—this time with our guide in tow. The golden statues, ancient Tibetan manuscripts in leather sleeves, and red-cushioned wooden benches of the monks fell under the watchful eyes of yet more guards. Still, throngs of visitors and the prayerful poured into and through the crowded
corridors. When a door opened, I was pushed into a small room where the holiest golden statue of Buddha sat. My detour was not in our guide’s plan, and I panicked at being separated from the group. It was not allowed.
244

“Wait,” I said to the monk, trying to push my way back.
But I had been sucked into yet another, smaller centrifuge of the prayerful. I fought the flow, uncomfortable in the swarm, afraid of losing my daughter and being separated from our guide. I had already acclimated to Chinese authority, and I failed to notice the opportunity laid out in front of me. It took so very little time.
In the corner, a throng of pilgrims filed past a shaved-headed monk in flowing red and orange robes. He received their offerings—yak’s butter and milky-white silk scarves—and laid his hands upon each in blessing.
“Hello,” a Tibetan girl said in English.
“Com-sa,” I replied in poor Tibetan.
I smiled at her simple English; she smiled at my limited Tibetan, and then she pulled me
hard into the blessing line with her, something I had been trying to avoid.
“I don’t have anything,” I said when I came face-to-face with the monk.
“An open heart?” the monk asked.
“Of course,” I blushed.
He nodded and blessed me by hitting me on the back with a cushion. When he was done,
he sent me back to the movement of the mini-kora.
“Too-je-che (thank you),” I said.
The experience—all of it—had a profound effect. I no longer fought the movement of the
prayerful. I accepted my place in the flow, and I understood the dream of a lifetime—going to Tibet—had been replaced with the lesson of a lifetime. I was humbled by it, by the Tibetan people. By their devotion. By their quiet resistance to authoritarian rule.
“Too-je-che,” I whispered again
245

It’s Time, Mom
During my fourth year in the Middle East, I had found a happy rhythm. I had friends and acquaintances and laughed more than I cried. I spoke Arabic with some fluency, took Tai-chi with a Chinese master, and tip toed in the surf with Aliyah and her sisters. On some nights, Fadi and I ate on the shoreline in a little Vietnamese restaurant named Hanoi and played with the toddler son of the owner’s daughter-in-law. I shopped for groceries at Choithram’s, bought a silk wardrobe at Milano’s, and frequented a Syrian bakery named Cinnamon. I lived with a man I loved and worked in a place I liked, and in the early, early mornings, I left my little villa in the north and traveled the lonely desert highway on my way to Dubai. I learned to accept the daily drive and was rewarded with stunning sunrises as the reddest of red suns radiated from the floor of red, golden-flecked desert sands. On the way home on the road between the desert highway and the green sea, I stopped and waited for camels to cross the road, and rather than worrying about time, I accepted what I could not change. Insha’allah (in God’s time), I said when my plans were curtailed or cut or disrupted in some way. And for a long time, this new rhythm, this new attitude worked.
Things began to change, however, when Americans were no longer considered the gold standard. In the UAE, simply possessing an American passport earned its owner respect. A lot of it. At least until Trump. When he was elected, managers were relieved of their kid gloves, and Americans were treated with a general lack of respect. The practice was clear at Canadian University Dubai. Soon after the election, Americans disappeared from the faculty.
“Too expensive,” other faculty members whispered about the Americans.
So the day Katlyn graduated from Colorado College, I was forced to watch the proceedings from my desk at my home in Ras al Khaimah; it was livestreamed. Although it
246

broke my heart not to be there to celebrate her accomplishment, in the end, I had the best seat in the house; in fact, from my computer screen, I could see Katlyn mouth the words thank you as she accepted her diploma. Still, I should have been there in person. My request to travel to Colorado was denied by the administrators of Canadian University Dubai. They did not even consider it.
I was not expected to attend CUD’s graduation ceremony, so there was no conflict. In an effort to downgrade the venue and save a little money, only deans were invited to graduation that year. My request to travel was denied because the administration feared I would not return in time for summer classes. At least, that was what they said. Their trust in me had evaporated with the installation of an American president they were sure would not object to the poor treatment of his citizens. And if I chose to leave despite their objection, I would risk having my work visa revoked. Exiting the country was never a secret; HR teams received a text notice when one of their employees left or reentered. Positively Orwellian, huh?
In an attempt to ameliorate the sting, I asked permission to attend the graduation ceremonies in Dubai where Fadi was being awarded his Master’s degree; I was denied again.
“Too many of ze faculty want to come,” the foppish French dean told me. “If we grant ze permission to you,” he began his sentence as I walked away from his office.
The year before, Sheikh Nahyan bin Mubarak Al Nahyan, a cousin to the crown prince Mohammed bin Salman (MBS), attended the ceremonies with an entourage of sons and grandsons, nephews and courtiers, security guards and personal photographers. There were, at least, twenty-five men in the royal retinue. When they entered the graduation venue in Dubai, there was a flurry of flowing white kanduras, eye-blinding flash bulbs, and the ingratiating behaviors of university administrators. Since they were on Arab time, their arrival put the
247

ceremony significantly behind schedule. After the sheikh finished speaking and was expected to leave the scene, traffic around Dubai stopped as the roads were cleared for his and his retinue’s departure. Many of us, therefore, did get home until very late in the evening. So despite the dean’s declaration to the contrary, I knew the faculty were relieved not to attend the ceremony. Still, I would neither see Fadi receive his diploma in Dubai nor Katlyn receive hers at home.
“Mom,” Katlyn said the day after graduation, “do you think I can find a job in Dubai?” “Of course,” I said and readied for Katlyn’s return to our home in Ras al Khaimah.
A few months after Katlyn’s hopeful arrival, she returned to the US jobless, and Ras al
Khaimah seemed much, much further away from my home in Northeastern Pennsylvania. After celebrating my father’s eighty-sixth birthday on a Wednesday in the middle of the month— without him, of course—Katlyn ordered a one-way ticket home. Together, my father’s absence and Katlyn’s exit from Ras al Khaimah left me stuck in a crushing loneliness. On the morning she left, there was a malaise hanging over my beautiful, little home on the Arabian Gulf that made it feel emptier, more isolated, and it was not just me that felt it. Our little Shih-tzu—the most pampered pet in the Middle East—was listless, laying the whole day on the couch, lifting his head only when he thought he heard someone walking upstairs. My husband, too, roamed the house, mostly sighing, catching cat-naps, feeling unusually dispirited. The three of us seemed unable to fully function as we waited out the long hours to Katlyn’s arrival in the US.
When I first arrived in the UAE, I called my parents regularly although not as often as when I lived near them. Then, I called them at least once a day, but in the UAE, I called them two or three times each week. I kept all our conversations positive, never letting on that I was homesick, never admitting that I wanted to come home. I talked about the camels, the wonders of
248

Dubai, the heat. I told my parents—mostly my dad by that point in my mom’s regression into dementia—about the things I had done and the things I had seen. He seemed genuinely excited and asked related questions. My mom, on the other hand, could not seem to grasp the fact I was so far away. Why didn’t she visit? she must have asked herself. Phone conversations were opportunities to satisfy her desperate need to establish a time when we would meet again.
“When will we see you?” she would interrupt the conversation.
“In the summer, mom,” I would reply.
While my mother had no real sense of time, she did understand that “in the summer” was
not immediate. She could not have told me what time of the year it was or even what year it was, but she had an intuitive sense of summer being a long time away. Maybe she sensed it in my voice or maybe she saw it in my father’s face when I answered. All I knew was that she knew. Somehow she knew.
One February evening, I was showing off by speaking Arabic to my parents when my mother interrupted with a question.
“When will we see you?”
“Remember, mommy. In the summer. In July.”
A few minutes later, my father cut me off as I spoke to my mother.
“Do you want to see me alive?” my dad asked morbidly.
“That’s nice, dad,” I teased, but I did not feel the joke.
He had upset me, and for the next few hours, his words rattled around in my head. I felt
spooked by them. So the next day, I booked two tickets. Collin and I would travel home within a few weeks. When I arrived on a Friday night, they were overjoyed to see us. We had arranged for Katlyn to travel home as well. After so many months away, everything looked the same. My
249

parents sat at the same round oaken table in their same chairs with the same newspapers around them. I had a feeling, however, that everything had changed.
“Dad,” I said a little later. “Why do you always ask when I’m coming home?” “Because I want to know,” he said matter-of-factly.
“It makes me homesick,” I said. “And it’s really hard on me.”
“Wait until your children go away,” he said. “Then you’ll see what hard is.”
When Katlyn left the United Arab Emirates for the United States, I finally understood my father’s warning. I wanted Katlyn to stay longer, but a new career, love, and graduate school called her back into a brand-new life of her own. One without my everyday physical presence in it. She had to do it; the only job offer she received in Dubai was pitiful. A $3 an hour offer to work long hours with troubled children. Because she did not have a visa, the company decided to treat her poorly, and while she liked the job, Fadi discouraged her from accepting the pathetic wages.
“Katlyn, the offer is an insult,” he told her.
“But it’s for a good cause,” she said. “It’s working with children, Fadi.”
“I’d rather pay you the money not to take the job,” he said.
In the end, Katlyn listened to Fadi, and when she could not find another job, she left for
home to start her own life. As an adult. And while we knew that our separation was only physical and also only temporary, her time with us those few months brought new life to our little home, something that had been lost when Collin left for university a year and a half earlier.
After dropping her at the Dubai Airport, I fell into a puddle of tears while her stepfather sniffled quietly in the driver’s seat. He pretended to be unaffected. It was an Arab thing.
250

I am proud of you. You are beginning a beautiful brilliant life, I texted her.
I wish I could take you with me! she replied.
Before she left, Katlyn told me I should come and live with her. It was not the first time
she had said it. Once I entered my fifties, my daughter began making plans for me. Our roles, it would seem, were beginning a transition of some sort. While I had always been the caretaker of my children, Katlyn was now making plans to care for me. And her stepfather. And Doodles. Maybe mostly Doodles.
Over the next few hours, I walked a long, lonely time on the Arabian Gulf. At one point, I sat on the sand and looked out over the marina. Small steel anchors on the ends of ropes clanked against the masts of sail boats moored in the harbor. Little silver fish played in the shallows where I dipped my red-painted toes; the school of fish moved as a group on the whims of the gentle waves, and I watched them swim in and around and over my feet. The beach of tiny pebbles and sky blue jelly fish was empty except for me and the tables and chairs and umbrellas of the owners from the big villas on the shoreline. The suspension bridge between Ras al Khaimah and the new homes on the man-made island was relatively quiet. There was hardly any traffic because the late afternoon lunch crowd had not yet made its way to the restaurants along the bank.
A few hours after we left her in the Dubai Airport, Katlyn had reached the first leg of her long journey back to the US.
I’m in Riyadh, she texted.
Only a few years earlier, receiving such a text from either of my children would have been unimaginable. Riyadh? In the moment as I thought about it, I hoped we would have known that Riyadh was the capital of Saudi, but I was not sure. After moving to the Middle East,
251

however, Riyadh became just one more physical point on or away from our times of togetherness. So was Paris—where Collin attended film school at American University. And also New York and Ras al Khaimah and Colorado, and Delano, Pennsylvania. All these spaces marked the physical places where we came together. They were home. All of them. When we were together.
Almost a day later, as I waited for Katlyn to land in New York, I pulled out my iPhone and called Collin.
‘Hi, honey,” I chirped into the phone; “when’re you coming home?” “Hi, mom. Going to class now,” he said; “can we talk later?” “Sure,” I said disappointed.
“Mom?” he asked before hanging up.
“Yeah?”
“I love you beaucoup.”
Just as I hung up the phone, a text popped up on the home screen from Katlyn.
Just landed in New York!
Hooray, I texted back. I miss you so much. So does Doodles. And Fadi.
I miss you guys too! she typed in reply.
Come home to me, I texted.
I want you to come to me!
In the months that followed, Katlyn often asked me to come home. “It’s time, mom,” she
would say at the end of her calls, and I would take her request to heart. By Christmas, she had found a job and was applying to graduate school, and because of her new work schedule, she could not join us in Dubai. Collin came late, choosing to visit the US before coming to me, and I
252

began to feel the pull to go home. In some kind of nostalgic haze, I visited the places I knew well—the Waldorf Astoria, the British Pub, the Pakistani souq in downtown Ras al Khaimah, the corniche, Al Hamra Mall—and took pictures of them all.
On my drive home from Dubai, I often stopped at the government-owned gas stations— ADNOC—that stood as potentially life-saving sentinels in the middle of the long desert drive. Leaving the car, I leaned over the camel fences that were established around the perimeter of the station and watched the magnificently large animals with long-lashed soulful eyes move in their slow, lumbering way; their long necks angled to the ground to feed on the wild sage. When they were close enough, I would talk to them. “Camels never forget,” Fadi told me once, and I liked the idea that someone or something would remember my time in the UAE. I stood looking across the desert dunes, to the sculptures of sand, wave-like and rippling in the desert wind, and I breathed deep the smell that radiated from the heat.
Many nights before the summer season of unbearable heat made its reentry, I drove to the Hilton beach club where I sat on the comfortable blue loungers on the almost empty beaches. Sometimes I meditated; other times, I just sat and watched the sunset over the Gulf. Some nights I recorded the sound of the waves on my iPhone and walked the shoreline in bare feet, picking up shells and stones and pocketing them for later. For some reason, I had developed a sense of nostalgia that pulsated through my body. It ached actually. Yet, I still lived and worked and loved in the Middle East, so I could not understand the need to catalogue it all. As I look back on that time, I must have felt the end of my time in the Middle East coming even if I was not aware of it. At least consciously. It’s time, mom echoed in my heart and my mind and pumped through my veins. Katlyn’s words prepared me for the change that was coming.
253

Something Magical, Something Mystical
There was something magical, something mystical, something ancient that beat strong in me when I sat on the shores of the Arabian Gulf. A refuge, of sorts, for an expat set adrift. At the Hilton in Ras al Khaimah just in front and to the right of Trader Vic’s, I looked out towards the shores of Iran and questioned how I ended up in the UAE. On winter nights, I meditated to the sounds of softly crashing waves, and in the morning, I practiced tai-chi under the palms before the sun lifted fully into the sky. I strode up and down and down and up that slip of beach and stood on the spit of black lava rocks that shot into the sea looking for clues. It was a well-worn trail where my footprints found a place in the imported white sand.
As I sat out on the first night of winter, I recognized some distant past stretched out just beyond my comprehension. With the tips of my outstretched hand, I could almost touch it, but not quite. Yet, I knew it instinctively, just as I know to take breath. We—the ocean and me— have had a long history. A love affair, I supposed. Over centuries. Millennia, maybe. Yet, for as much as I was drawn to the sandy shores of the Gulf, I did not—not ever—go into it. Gazed at it, yes. Toe splashed, sometimes. Accepted its endeavor to lure me into its embrace, never. I knew better although I did not know why.
While I refused to lose my whole self to it, I answered when it called. At least, a little. There were nights when I slept on the beach in the blue and white covered loungers after all the bathers had gone and the music from the resort played on inside. After many months of too- unbearable heat, I came once again to the Arabian Gulf. To its shores. To celebrate the breaking of the summer stranglehold. As the sun dipped behind the horizon on the outer edges of the ocean, I sat alone—or almost alone—on a wide expanse of glassy-white sand, listening to the
254

waves crash against the shore, imagining the stories of those on distant shores who were, I imagined, imagining my story.
“Come to me,” the ocean whispered in the crash and hiss of wave. “No.” I answered.
“Let me feel you,” it persisted.
“No,” I said again, not giving in to its soft rumble.
I stayed where I was, fifty feet from its embrace on a blue and white lounger. I watched its machinations from the corner of my eye and focused instead on an Emirati family dancing dangerously close to its edge. The father in white kandura and headscarf sat on the shore with his very young children while his wife in black abaya and veil snapped pictures of the changing colors of the dusky sky. Their contrast in black and white framed the blue-graying of the water, the graying-orange of the sky, the white edging of the crashing waves, the red round buoys in the shallows. Greyish-white birds were carried on the first night of winter’s wind; their cries, too, were carried almost out of ear-shot with its gusts. The Emirati boy—not more than two years old—chased one to the water’s edge.
“Khalas (finished),” the father yelled to his young son who tip-toed too close to the edge. “La (no),” the mother added, moving quickly towards him, taking his arm.
Perhaps they, too, have had a long history from a far-distant past. Like me, they were
careful; they did not get too close. Like me, they felt the ocean’s pull. Like me, they retreated to blue and white loungers when they recognized the danger of being too mesmerized by something so alive in its inanimate-ness.
The din of forming waves in the distance, the crashing of dying waves on the shore muted all other sound. For the first time in months, it was cool in the desert, cool enough to sit at
255

the ocean’s edge. Cool enough to feel the beginning of goose flesh rise on my arms. Cool enough. Finally.
“Come,” the ocean’s clarion call came again. “We have a destiny. You and I.”
“We have lived out our destiny,” I replied.
“There is more for us. Another chorus. Another chance.”
With the ocean’s insistence, the wind kicked up, the sand swirled, the buoys bobbed in
the near distance. The inky blue of night overtook the pinky-orange of dusk, and the lights of a distant resort twinkled on. Sand and salt mixed together in my throat. Strands of hair blew across my face, unwilling to be contained. A fishing boat with its green-lighted stern started its engine and roared away across the waves. The Emirati family was gone. Only a thin fox with the brushed-out trail of a tail ran along the edge of the Gulf. I was alone.
Years ago, I set my intention. Please, I begged the Divine, I need the money to live at the ocean. My prayer was granted, just not in the way I had supposed it would be. Rather than buying my way to the ocean—New Jersey, maybe, I lost my way. I lost everything, in fact. Without a job, I fell far into financial collapse. Just before the end, however, I moved—really moved; nine time zones away, it was. Although I was farther from my childhood home, my family, my ageing parents than I had ever been before, each day I opened my eyes to the ocean in front of me. My wish had come true. Kind of.
This dream is dangerous, I considered. “To lose everything for it,” I said out loud. “Why does it have such power over me?”
“We have a history,” the ocean whispered back, “one that is magical, mystical, ancient. Primordial.”
“It is an understanding that is just out of reach,” I replied.
256

“Yes,” the waves softened.
“It is an understanding that I almost know.”
“Yes,” the sonorant music of the ocean replied again. “Come to me.”
A thin line of orange remained on the horizon. The waves had become less insistent.
Black moved to take its place in the early evening sky, and two lovers walked the edge of the water where the fox had been. A smattering of stars. A sliver of moon. I was content.
257

Still an American
In the searing midday sun with the stinging, brackish sand lifted and held hostage by the desert wind, skin suffered mightily; a vast business of expensive ointments and costly cosmetics were born to combat the consequences of living on the Arabian peninsula. There were a myriad of face creams, eye creams, and creams for one’s hands and feet. There were upper lip creams and cuticle creams and creams to reduce the signs of ageing. In swanky spas that specialized in facials, women wore masks of mud filled with real gold while their bodies were oiled and wrapped in plastic sheets. To smooth and strengthen skin, a home remedy of cotton strips soaked in warmed-up camel pee and milk were laid like mummy wrappings on wrinkles. And when women completed their skin-saving, complexion-brightening routines, they commenced with their beauty routines. They smoothed on base and blushers and puffed up their lips with Botox. Egyptian-like kohl lined eyes and an artist’s palette of shadows coordinated with clothes. To thicken and lengthen what nature had not, spa workers wove in long synthetic lashes, and tattoos were added were eyebrows had been.
One night, I stood at the bathroom sink and stared into the mirror while I applied a series of dabs from a collection of tiny white ceramic jars. My tall Arab husband stood next to me shaving, watching intently. At first, he looked amused. With a neck full of foam, Fadi stopped to read the label on one of the costly skin care products. The label was written in both Arabic and English. Looking through the mirror so as not to confront me directly, Fadi’s amusement seemed to turn to something else.
“What’s this?” he asked with color in his voice.
“I have my own money,” I said in a defensive posture. “I work.”
“Jackie,” Fadi laughed; “buy what you want.”
258

“Why did you ask then?” I demanded.
“It’s whitener,” he said with a raised eyebrow; “for your skin. There,” he said and pointed to the Arabic word for whitener.
“I spent a fortune on this,” I exhaled.
“Well,” he said reading the Arabic, “it will definitely help whiten your skin.”
“I’m using it anyway,” I said defiantly; “it cost too much to throw away.”
“Go ahead,” Fadi said. “But I won’t be able to see you,” he laughed in mock sadness.
“I’m afraid you’ll disappear.”
Fadi’s comment was prophetic, but it was not the whitener that caused my disappearance
from the Middle East.
For months after Trump was sworn in, foreigners were let go from Canadian University Dubai. Sometimes they disappeared quickly without so much as a good-bye. Sometimes they were fired but were allowed to stay on for a semester, the summer, another school year. As the spring semester wore on, the fall contracts of many of the Americans had not been renewed. We held our collective breath, waiting for word of our fates. When the legal deadline for non- renewal came and went, we felt somewhat relieved. While we lived without a new contract, at least we were not let go. Until we were. In mid-July.
After I had finished my summer classes and submitted the grades, I traveled into the university from Ras al Khaimah to represent the faculty at an international conference. In the hall outside the auditorium, I bumped into the foppish French dean with the meticulously sculpted eye brows and overly gelled side-shaved haircut. He wore a skinny cobalt blue suit, the one he wore whenever he was scheduled to speak.
259

“We meet later, eh?” he asked. “Een my offeees.”
Over the course of the year, he and I had had our share of disagreements. As an English professor, I published creative work; but one day, he announced at a faculty meeting that creative work did not count as publication. Not in his university anyway. He had been at the university for less than three months, and I was one of the few faculty members that published at all. Creative or research-based. I suspected the administration was ginning up an excuse to relieve another American of her contract. So when I saw the HR administrator in the dean’s office, I was ready for the bad news. I had practiced my response for weeks. Just in case.
“Eet eez harrrd forrr me to tell you dees,” the dean began. “Eet has been a difficoolt yearrr forrr me. I have been . . ..”
“For once,” I cut him off, “this is not about you. It’s about me. Can you get on with it?” “Of course, but eet eez harrd forrr me.”
I rolled my eyes. “It will be harder for me, I’m guessing.”
“Yes. Yes.”
The HR assistant rolled her eyes when he began to talk again. About himself. She interrupted the Frenchman and spoke directly to me: “I’m sorry; you won’t be renewed.”
“You missed the May deadline,” I said. “You need to pay me out through the semester.”
While I quoted the law correctly, the university had enough money and wasta (influence) to flout the law.
“No,” the HR assistant said, pushing the ministry-approved paperwork towards me, “we owe you a penalty. One extra month of salary.”
“I am sorry; eet eez harrd for me to loose professors.”
260

“Why am I not being renewed?” I asked.
“Beecause there eez not eenough students, and your salaree eez too high.”
At least he’s honest, I thought.
Canadian University Dubai decided to end the contracts of most of the Westerners. Their
benefits packaged proved expensive especially compared to our Arab counterparts from Syria or Palestine or Egypt. The unrest in those Arab countries made it difficult for faculty to refuse to accept a pay cut. They would stay on and teach more classes for less money, and they would not protest the changes. Westerners would.
I saw it coming. All around me, Americans were being forced from their jobs and sent home. The cost of oil had nose-dived since I had moved to the UAE. Moreover, with Trump in office, there was no longer a need to pay the expat rate or, more importantly, to protect the Americans who worked in country. While Americans continued to fight and hold up their contracts for proof, they did not know Trump had already sold them out for a few golf resorts in Dubai and cash in his pocket.
While I was not sad to see my contract at the university end, I assumed I would work another semester; I counted on it actually. I had been offered the principal position at a brand new American-curriculum school in Oman, and I was looking forward to starting in December. I assumed the university would need me until then. In addition to the school in Oman, I had other interviews and opportunities presented to me in the previous months, yet I had heard nothing pertaining to a contract. It was not unusual actually; Emiratis generally waited until the end of the summer to make their offers. I could not wait, however. Without a contract in hand, it would be too risky and too expensive to reenter the country.
261

As I walked through the university coffee shop on my way from the dean’s office, a student from one of my spring classes waved to me.
“Miss,” he yelled and quickened his pace.
Sultan was a prince from another Gulf country who had staked out his seat on the first day of class—center seat, front row—and remained there unchallenged for the rest of the semester. Right in front of me.
“Miss, I will take another class. With you,” he said waving his fall schedule. “I’m sorry, Sultan,” I smiled sadly. “My contract was not renewed.”
“No, miss. This cannot be,” Sultan said defiantly.
I pointed to the Dean’s office on the floor above, “It’s true, Sultan, but I’m sure you’ll have an excellent teacher. Maybe Miss Taghreed,” I said hoping that we would have my friend as his teacher.
“No. I will lodge a complaint with the embassy. My father will speak on your behalf,” he said.
“It’s okay, Sultan,” I said. “Maybe it’s a sign for me to go home.”
“Are you American?” he asked, and I heard my mother’s whisper through his question. “Yes, I’m still an American,” I laughed.
When I arrived in New York on Friday, the 13th, my sister met me the airport. She was there to pick up Doodles while I made my way through customs. He would be sent, I was told in Dubai, to another building. As I waited for my luggage, the cell phone rang.
“They don’t have him,” my sister yelled into the phone. “What?” I said the panic rising.
262

“They don’t have Doodles. There’s no record of him. He didn’t fly.”
When I hung up, I dialed the Dubai Airport and begged for help. Then, I called Fadi and asked him to call. In the meantime, I lugged my luggage to the Emirates desk at JFK.
“Did you check the luggage carousel?” the woman in hijab asked.
“I was told he would be delivered to another building,” I replied.
“Check the carousel,” she said bored by my presence.
More than an hour earlier, I had exited the passenger side of the airport and made my way
into the main hall. I could not return through the one-way doors to the luggage carousel. In a panic, I ran to security.
“Please!” I said in desperation.
When I rolled out the whole sad story, the security guard took me to the luggage carousel, and there, making his way round and round on the belt was Doodles. In relief, I grabbed the crate and thanked the guard profusely.
“I found him,” I said after calling Fadi. “I found him,” I told my sister and then met her at the front doors to the airport.
Later, when I flew to Colorado to visit my children, Katlyn walked me a few blocks up the street to an apartment building.
“What’s this?” I asked her.
“Sometimes a girl needs her mom,” she said.
“Katlyn, I need to go back.”
“If it’s not safe for Doodles,” she said and stopped for the obvious conclusion. “Is it alright?” I asked Fadi on the phone.
263

“Of course,” he said. “Try to find a job.”
An hour later, I signed a lease to live in Colorado.
Less than a week later on the same day I accepted a temporary position in a middle
school in Colorado, I received a hefty offer from a school in Dubai. It was the kind of money people wait their whole professional lives for.
“School starts in two weeks,” the man said. “When can we expect your return?” “You waited too long,” I said. “It’s almost August.”
“What?” he asked in shock.
“I interviewed months ago. I heard nothing from you.”
“We told you we were interested,” he said.
When I hung up the phone, my chest heaved; I would not return to the Middle East. Probably ever. Instead, Fadi would ship the contents of our little villa to Colorado, and I would live for months in an almost empty apartment. At one point in my life, the move to Colorado might have been seen as a bold one, but the change barely registered with my family and friends. Especially in comparison to my last move.
Weeks after Fadi helped me move in to the new apartment and he had returned to Dubai, I was sitting on a second-hand chair in my new apartment. The Rockies rose majestically over the sagebrush plains of cowboy territory just outside my window, and I watched the new TV that sat on the floor of my apartment. It was the morning of John McCain’s funeral, and I had been crying for hours when my sister called.
“What’s wrong?” she asked.
“I watched the McCain funeral,” I answered. “It’s been over for hours,” she said.
264

“I don’t know what’s wrong with me,” I cried.
Later, I recognized my wistfulness; I longed for a home that was not mine. I missed the smell of the saltmarsh and the sound of little black crabs click click clicking on the scattered rocks by the scrub brush, and I missed looking out my front door at the stick-legged flamingos with the red sands of the desert as their backdrop. I calculated how long it had been since I sat for lunch at La Luna’s on the waterfront and listened to the clinking of the masts in the harbor. I knew it had been too long since I heard the sound of Allah’s name in the quiet of the predawn hours on a misty winter morning, and it had not been long enough since I steeled myself to face a wall of hellish heat and humidity outside my villa door. There was no Cloithrams, no Al Naeem Mall, no Al Hamra to visit. While I saw horses on a trip to Wyoming, there were no wild goats or donkeys or the lanky lumbering camels on long drives between the desert and the sea. Food had a longer shelf life, but it did not taste as good. Short sleeves and exposed legs, bathing suits and miniskirts were all fair game, but I had forgotten how to dress like an American. I missed the sound of Arabic and the laughter of my friends and the broken English of those who tried to communicate with me. I missed Fadi.
Unable to find a job with such a short timeline, he returned to the little school in Ras al Khaimah where we first met. Now Fadi spends winter breaks and spring breaks and summers with me. He stood by me in August when Katlyn married, and he will travel to meet me in May to celebrate Collin’s graduation. We talk on Skype and text and laugh on the phone, and if he can find a job next year, he will join me in Colorado. The Arab cowboy, I tell him.
“Do you miss me?” he teases when he calls.
“Maybe I should have stayed,” I say.
“No, lovely,” he replies; “you made the right choice.”
265

“But you’re not here.”
“Insha’allah (God willing),” he says. “It won’t be long.”
As I wait for Fadi to return, I dream of the Gulf and of the rising and setting of the sun
over the desert dunes. I smell the bitter burn of Turkish coffee, and my mouth waters for the warm sweetness of umm ali. Under my kitchen sink, I sneak sniffs form the last jar of Omani myrrh; the frankincense was finished long ago. All around me are the artifacts of my time in the Middle East. On the walls. On tables. In pictures on my desk. They assure me I did, in fact, move and change and emerge transformed from the experience.
I went to live in the United Arab Emirates in the middle of Obama’s second term and returned in the middle of Trump’s first. In that time, the world changed for Americans. And expats paid the price. This is not a partisan or ideological insight; rather it was born from experience. My experience.
Last week, I saw Ambassador Masha Yovanovitch testify in front of Congress. After admitting that Trump had the right to remove her from her job, she added a little sadly, “I do wonder why it was necessary to smear my reputation.” Her brave words brought me full circle to the feeling of helplessness, the Humpty-Dumpty brokenness that drove me to the Middle East in the first place. I too was fired and smeared by a man who hungered for power over me. He thought he broke me. He believed his metaphoric knife twist had shattered me, and he was right, but only for a little while. He had misjudged me. I was stronger than he thought I was, stronger than I thought I was, and I survived one man’s egomaniacal fear-induced malice towards me.
I moved to a new country, learned a new language, made many friends, found love, married, traveled, taught my children about the wider world. I spent time in Cyprus and Greece, Nepal, Tibet, and China. I spoke at one conference in India and keynoted another in Malaysia. In
266

the countries of East Africa, I adopted a baby elephant, spent time in the jungles of Zanzibar, and paid my respects to the oldest known human fossils. I learned to interact with people from all over the world, many of whom taught me what real resilience, pure courage, and simple humble joy looked like. At a time when I felt shattered and shaken to the core, I started all over again. I put aside all of the things I had intended to do and accepted a new 10,000 things with which to organize and shape a new life. The people I have met in the places I have been have molded and inspired and refined me into something new. I am strong because of these changes. In the lands of the crucible that is the Middle East, I was born again.
267

Afterword
I see her often. Mostly in dreams. Sometimes awake. She walks solitary through the desert sands at sunset. Alone. Her thoughts and her footprints leave trails through the uninterrupted waves of the desert dunes. White silk pants, the kind that gather at the ankles, flutter in the space between the red sands and the golden-red glow of the setting sun. A gauzy white scarf covers her face from the blowing, stinging sand. Her scarf rolls out long behind her. Through her, I feel the biting nostalgia for what had once been; I feel her self-probing questions: Did it really happen? she wonders. Remember, she challenges herself, a talisman to the fog that has already begun to cloud her memories.
I feel her thoughts and feelings, her prayers, her musings because she is me—or a part of me. She is the dream part I see at night from the bed in my little home under the snow-capped mountains of the cowboy-storied West. When I walk with Doodles around the cerulean blue lake where ducks and pelicans roost and reel in the hazy fog of the morning cool, the side-shadow casting of fall light reminds me to remember, and I see her. She is the bit of heart and soul I left behind when I departed the Middle East on a Friday, the 13th in July. She is my experience, my memory, my hold on what had been.
“Remember,” I whisper to myself as she turns towards me, her eyes—my eyes—younger and wiser staring back at me.
“You left me,” she whispered, not so much an accusation as a fact. “I didn’t have a choice,” I countered defensively.
“You left the desert too quickly.
“The desert left me,” I tried to explain.
268

The scene pans out, and I see her footprints—my footprints—and I know I walked through miles of time and change to become the woman I am today. In the crucible of the Middle East, I was broken down into essential parts and put together again anew. It was there I learned to cope with my new reality as an orphan in the world and with my changing roles as mother, daughter, sister, wife, friend, and professional. Yet, I survived and eventually called the Middle East home. When I left loved ones in the US, I opened my heart to others. I rode camels and learned Arabic, drank tea with covered women and men in kandura. I experienced the tallest building in the world, the largest mall, the greatest man-made island, the biggest fireworks display. I traveled the paths where Jesus and Mohammed had walked and dangled my feet in the dirty brew of the Jordan River. I visited Petra and the Potala Palace, went on safari, climbed the Great Pyramid, and prayed with Buddhist monks in Kathmandu. I married for love and learned to love my life again.
I see her footprints—my footprints—in the desert. They are the imprint I left on the land that imprinted itself on me.
269
